In pre-Covid times, Sundays at our Bangalore home were for biriyani with family and friends.

One Sunday, I received the verdict on my first attempt at my mother’s famed recipe. Everyone loved it but said that it lacked her “kai guna.” The phrase is from Kannada, the language of the South Indian state of Karnataka. It refers to the quality of the hand of a creator, or, in this case, the cook. There are variations of this word across South Indian languages that refer to the intangible uniqueness that people bring to something they have created.

While my family’s sentiments were understandable, this led me to think about whether the English language contained its own expressive words that encapsulated entire concepts about food. Was there a word like the Japanese “kuchinaoshi,” which translates to “mouth fix,” a way to describe eating something tasty to “fix” the bad taste in your mouth from something else? What about the Swedish idea of “lagom,” which means “not too much, not too little”? It’s a way of expressing the need for balance in life, even when it comes to eating. In Spanish, there’s “sobremesa,” which captures the idea of lingering at the table long after a meal is finished and enjoying one another’s company.

Cornelia Gerhardt, an English linguist at Saarland University in Germany and one of the founders of culinary linguistics, a field concerned with the ties between language and food, believes that English is a language that does not like to pack too much information into one word.

“English is analytical, using a series of words to explain an idea,” Dr. Gerhardt said, “unlike polysynthetic languages (where entire concepts are reduced to a single word) or agglutinative languages (where suffixes and prefixes are added to a root word to create new words).”

The Norwegian word “utepils,” for example, is a noun that translates to “outside beer,” or the experience of having a beer outside on a sunny day. The literal meaning is easily understood in English. But to truly grasp its cultural context, one would need to understand that Norway is dark and cold for most of the year and, even in warmer weather, it can be rainy and overcast. So sitting outside with a beer on a sunny day is a rare pleasure. And all of that is encapsulated neatly into a single word.

Peggy Mohan, a linguist and visiting professor at Ashoka University in Delhi, said via email that many languages had “cryptic terms,” words whose meanings are difficult for nonnative speakers to grasp. Many of these are food words, she said.

“Such words get invented easily, and there is even a sense of fun and humor in creating these little tokens of an existence shared by a small community and obscure to outsiders,” she said.

But “English, especially American English, is in no way a ‘minority’ language in this global age,” Ms. Mohan continued. “It is a language that expects to have nonnative speakers, so it needs to be accessible. Cryptic terms would go against this need to engage and speak for the global community.”

But does that mean that English has not developed socially or culturally deep-rooted words about food of its own?

Dr. Anthony F. Buccini, an independent scholar in historical linguistics and food history, believes that, in some ways, it has.

“The quality of food discourse in a culture will affect the degree to which they come up with these interesting, peculiar, untranslatable words,” Dr. Buccini said in a phone interview. “And I think English has a lot of them.”

“A pizza parlor, for me, growing up in New Jersey, has to have certain associations,” Dr. Buccini said. “Italian family-owned. The furnishing was of a certain type. Other food items besides pizzas were a certain type — baked clams, mussels in tomato sauce.”

There are also compounds such as “pub crawl,” a group of people roaming from one bar to another, almost always drinking excessively, he added in a statement that has been paraphrased.

So while English may not have a single word that describes sitting outside on a sunny day while enjoying a beer, it has some lovely terms for culturally specific food concepts.

Ruth Dsouza Prabhu is an independent features journalist based in Bangalore, India. She has been published in Al Jazeera, Whetstone SA, The National, Good Beer Hunting and other publications in India.

Join us here to solve Crosswords, The Mini and other games by The New York Times.