Imagine living a virtual reality world where you can have your avatar play video games, shop, hang out with friends, attend concerts and weddings and even travel the world — all without leaving your home.

Or imagine walking down the street and checking the latest sports scores from a digital display that floats in front of you. Or sitting in class with students who are right next to you — and others who are not. 

These are just a few of the scenarios envisioned in a future metaverse, a fully realized digital world that exists beyond the one in which we live.

Do you find the idea intriguing? Exciting? Scary? Are you looking forward to a future when we are always hooked into a virtual world? Or do you fear it will be a dystopian nightmare?

In “What’s All the Hype About the Metaverse?,” Brian X. Chen writes:

The term “metaverse” is everywhere.

On Tuesday, Microsoft cited the so-called metaverse as a reason for acquiring the game developer Activision Blizzard for $68.7 billion, saying the deal would provide “building blocks for the metaverse.” Facebook’s founder, Mark Zuckerberg, has also bet on the metaverse and renamed his social networking company Meta. Google has worked on metaverse-related technology for years. And Apple has its own related devices in the works.

But what does the metaverse really mean, and does it even exist? Here’s what you need to know.

What is the metaverse, anyway?

The metaverse is the convergence of two ideas that have been around for many years: virtual reality and a digital second life.

For decades, technologists have dreamed of an era when our virtual lives play as important a role as our physical realities. In theory, we would spend lots of time interacting with our friends and colleagues in virtual space. As a result, we would spend money there, too, on outfits and objects for our digital avatars.

In what techies like Mr. Zuckerberg call the metaverse, virtual reality serves as a computing platform for living a second life online. In virtual reality, you wear a headset that immerses you in a 3-D environment. You carry motion-sensing controllers to interact with virtual objects and use a microphone to communicate with others.

Matthew Ball, a venture capitalist who has written extensively about the topic, said the metaverse represented the fourth wave to computers, following mainframe computing, personal computing and mobile computing.

“It’s moving into what people call ambient computing,” he said about the metaverse. “It’s about being within the computer rather than accessing the computer. It’s about being always online rather than always having access to an online world.”

That’s it? It’s you and your avatar interacting with others in a digital environment?

To put it simply, yes.

Does the metaverse already exist in gaming?

To some extent, there is already a metaverse in games. But — and it’s an important but — it’s rudimentary.

Some social elements of the metaverse can already be found in video games. Consider Fortnite, an online shooter game played on computers, game consoles and mobile devices. The average Fortnite player spends hundreds of hours in the game with a personal avatar, fighting with and interacting with the avatars of other players. Players also accrue virtual currency that unlocks outfits and other goodies to customize their avatars.

Students, read the entire article, then tell us:

How excited are you about the metaverse? Are you looking forward to a time when you can be hooked into a digital world 24 hours a day? Is the prospect of a fully virtual life more compelling than our current physical and material one? In your opinion, will the metaverse become a digital utopia — or dystopian nightmare?

While there’s no single definition or agreed-upon vision of the metaverse, if it does come to fruition, what would you like to see in it? What would you hope it wouldn’t be?

Does the article change your understanding of, or interest in, the metaverse? What aspect described in the article was most fascinating, intriguing or enticing? Do you think Microsoft’s acquisition of Activision Blizzard will hasten the arrival of the metaverse?

How much time do you currently spend in digital or virtual spaces? What kinds of things do you do there? Have you played video games like Roblox and Fortnite that might be described as metaverse adjacent, since players can build their own worlds and spend real money to customize their virtual avatars? If so, do your experiences make you more optimistic about a full-blown future metaverse reality?

What concerns do you have about the metaverse? In “The Metaverse’s Dark Side: Here Come Harassment and Assaults,” Sheera Frenkel and Kellen Browning write:

Yet even as tech giants bet big on the concept, questions about the metaverse’s safety have surfaced. Harassment, assaults, bullying and hate speech already run rampant in virtual reality games, which are part of the metaverse, and there are few mechanisms to easily report the misbehavior, researchers said. In one popular virtual reality game, VRChat, a violating incident occurs about once every seven minutes, according to the nonprofit Center for Countering Digital Hate.

How concerned should we be about negative behaviors like harassment and hate speech in the metaverse? Does any of what Ms. Frenkel and Mr. Browning describe resonate with your own experiences in digital and virtual spaces? What do you think could or should be done to prevent them?

Make a prediction: Will the metaverse ever become a reality? If so, when do you think it may arrive? In 10, 50 or 100 years? Or should we be skeptical of all the hype — at least for now?