An extensive fire on Thursday caused major damage to the clubhouse at the historic Oakland Hills Country Club in Bloomfield Township, Mich., the site of several U.S. Open golf tournaments, officials said.

John LeRoy, the fire chief in Bloomfield Township, said in an interview on Thursday night that firefighters were dispatched about 9:17 a.m. on Thursday to a report of the smell of smoke in the clubhouse. Using thermal imaging cameras and inspection holes, Chief LeRoy said, they were able to find flames in the attic of the clubhouse.

“It was just taking multiple people to narrow down that location,” Chief LeRoy told reporters on Thursday. “Unfortunately, the smell of smoke was in a large area. In large buildings, trying to figure out exactly where it’s coming from is very difficult.”

Firefighters also found heavy fire inside the walls and between floors of the building, officials said in a statement late Thursday. 

No one was hurt in the fire, whose cause was under investigation, according to fire officials. The clubhouse contained a rich collection of golf memorabilia, and it was unclear how much of that was saved, though firefighters and club staff members were able to recover some.

“There were people standing at the front door and they were handing items off,” Chief LeRoy said. “It was a pretty time-consuming process, but they did get out what they could.”

By 10 p.m., the fire had not been completely extinguished, and Chief LeRoy said that firefighters were still working to put it out.

“It’s extensive damage throughout the entire building,” he said. “It’s very destroyed. I don’t know how else to say it.”

Complicating efforts, a snowstorm blew through the area, producing ice and dumping about six inches of snow as firefighters worked the fire, Chief LeRoy said.

Rick Palmer, the club’s president, said in a statement on Thursday that it was a “gut-wrenching day.”

“We have lost our iconic clubhouse,” he said, adding that he was grateful to the firefighters who helped save some memorabilia. “It hurts to see this, but we are comforted to know that the heart and soul and legacy of the club resides in our membership and staff. Only time will tell what is next, but we will move forward with a purpose to honor all those who made this grand building come to life with their golf and their work.”

The club, which was founded in 1916, has hosted six U.S. Open tournaments and numerous star golfers, including Jack Nicklaus and Tiger Woods.

The clubhouse was designed by C. Howard Crane, an architect who worked on several Detroit theaters, and it was completed in August 1922, according to the club.

The club was host to Arnold Palmer’s first national tournament competition, when he competed in the 1946 Hearst National Junior Championship, in which he was runner-up to MacGregor Hunter, according to club history.

The club has also hosted heads of state, including former President George H.W. Bush and John Major, the former British prime minister, during the 2004 Ryder Cup. Former President George W. Bush visited in 2014.

David Coulter, the Oakland County executive, said on Twitter that the fire was a “tragic loss.”

“I’m thankful that no one was hurt in the blaze and hope for a speedy recovery and rebuild for the club that has brought such a rich golfing heritage to Oakland County,” he said.

The United States Golf Association also said it was relieved that no one had been injured.

“Along with so many others in the golf community, we have special memories at this storied venue and look forward to making more with them in the coming years,” the association said.

The U.S.G.A. recently announced that the Oakland Hills Country Club would host the U.S. Women’s Open in 2031 and 2042.