‘State of the Union’When to watch: Now, on SundanceNow and AMC+.

The new season of this short-form bickering dramedy, written by Nick Hornby and directed by Stephen Frears, stars Brendan Gleeson and Patricia Clarkson as a couple on the brink of divorce. Each episode takes place in the 10 minutes before their marriage counseling sessions, and it’s easy to see how locked into old habits they are; she’s still wearing a pink “pussy hat,” and he sputters unfrozen caveman transphobia.

“Union” feels like a play — specifically that beginning part of the play, when you quietly panic and begin an awkward prayer of desperation. “I hope this gets good soon; I hope I lock into whatever is happening; if this doesn’t start feeling more real, I am in for a terrible night.”

But then it does, and the rush of relief is worth twice the price of admission. “Union” shines at its meanest, and it moves through a surprising range of dynamics in each brief installment. Your best bet is to watch all 10 in a row, appetizers-for-dinner, “Mermaids”-style.

‘Painting With John’When to watch: Friday at 11 p.m., on HBO.

The musician, actor and artist John Lurie returns for a second season of delivering sanguine, meandering philosophy lectures while painting. Think of this show as the opposite of listening to podcasts at 1.5 speed; it has a magical lack of urgency and focus but still results in enlightenment. Lurie muses about his own experiences, about nature, about praise.

In the fourth episode, he gazes into the camera and croaks, “adahbahdeewah.” After a moment, he says he hopes the people writing the closed captioning capture his terminology accurately. “Adahbahdeewah means absurd, but in an optimistic way,” he explains, “like, ‘“Painting With John” is adahbahdeewah.’” Exactly.

‘One Mississippi’When to watch: Now, on Hulu and Amazon.

Tig Notaro co-created and stars in this loosely autobiographical comedy, which ran from 2015 to 2017, about a comedian who comes home to Mississippi after her mother’s death and winds up staying longer than she planned. Even though the show deals with sad and heavy topics, “Mississippi” is easy to like and easy to love, insightful in ways that are calming rather than jarring. If you’re into “Somebody Somewhere,” or if you’re dazzled by Sheryl Lee Ralph in “Abbott Elementary” (her character in this series arrives in Season 2 and is amazing), or if you’re just dreaming of spring, watch this.