Despite an M.A., J.D. and Ph.D. in communications, when Lisa Perry applies for a job, she frequently omits her second doctorate from her resume.

"The perception of Ph.D.s is ivory-towered, egghead intellectuals who can't hold a 'real' job and get their hands dirty," says the attorney, who works on a contract basis with a San Francisco, Calif., law firm and as an adjunct professor. Her concern on the job hunt is getting labeled as prima donna who expects a higher salary, and de facto being automatically eliminated from the candidate pool. "I have been asked if I would be able to take direction from someone without a graduate degree."

10 Ways You're Dumbing Down Your Work Experience

Increasingly, workers are playing down their education and work experience in order to land a job. And given the national average unemployment rate has held steady for the past two months at 9.5%, any job will do--even for the most talented individuals and whether or not it offers a pay package, benefits, title and responsibilities commensurate with their employment history.

Being qualified is a critical factor in whether a prospective employee will get the job. Being over-qualified accomplishes the exact opposite. But if you're overly concerned about the latter, you may miss out on opportunities today--and tomorrow.

This is particularly important for many women, who tend to underemphasize their accomplishments. As Kelly Watson writes in "The Four Myths of Self-Promotion": "This hesitance to self-promote hurts women's careers. In today's competitive world the people most vocal about their accomplishments are the ones most likely to get ahead. And by downplaying their accomplishments and deflecting praise onto others, women act like their own worst enemies."

When To Speak Up

As a result of the sluggish economy, skin care entrepreneur Melanie Knight, of Grace and Pepper Organics in San Diego, Calif., has tried to explore 9-5 opportunities--with less-than-stellar results. "I have had several recruiters and potential employers tell me that being an entrepreneur is hindering my success at finding a job."

What's particularly troublesome about an entrepreneur as a job candidate? She will leave the company as soon as her sales pick up.

As a pre-emptive strike, Knight now tries to emphasize her skill set--her orientation to detail, her ability to multitask and wear different hats--rather than her business specialty. "I try to emphasize how my skills can help the company and how they match the position they are hiring for," she says.

Suzanne Grossman, a career coach, lecturer at the College of Staten Island and founder of the blog Love Your Job recommends highlighting the value of your work experiences and its direct relevance to a potential job by telling your unique story. "The exact details of your past positions are less important than your own story, which includes your many accomplishments," she says.

There is no substitute for knowledge gained from accomplishment. As résumé specialist Wendy Enelow explains, rather than particular work experiences, emphasize what she calls "skills summaries"--projects, achievements and the experiences related to them.

When to Shut Up

According to Katy Piotrowski, M.Ed., author of The Career Coward's Guide to Resumes, it's prudent to keep degrees and work experiences under cover when they aren't a specific job requirement. "Selectively choose key pieces to share--elements that showcase you best for the position," says Piotrowski. "That may mean leaving out a degree that isn't relevant or that shows you as overqualified for the job. Too much data, like too many accessories, can make you look less attractive."

She adds you can always include a statement such as, "Additional educational details and work history available on request."

But think twice about selective omission, warns Katy Keogh, principal at Massachusetts-headquartered staffing firm Winter, Wyman Financial Contracting. What if, for example, your employer is not aware you've earned a particular degree when you're in line for a promotion that requires that degree? "An omission can come back to haunt a job candidate," says Keogh. "Full disclosure from the start is always better--and probably more lucrative--in the long run."

Lorneth Fahie of Clarskville, Tenn., an academic counselor, originally omitted her master's degree in corporate communications during the hiring process for a transcript clerk position at a nearby college; the only educational requirement was an associate's degree or high school diploma. But during the background check the college discovered she had earned a master's. "The committee asked why I applied for the job that did not require a higher degree. I was honest and told them that I was in need of a job." Fair enough. Two years later she was promoted to an academic counselor role, one that required a master's degree that her employer already knew about.

Where to draw the line

When it comes to the bachelor's degree however, that is considered an untouchable. When Katie Danziger applied for a promotions job at a national daily sports newspaper (since folded), her interviewer viewed her Ivy League credential as a detriment. "When she saw that I went to Yale University, she was intimidated and didn't want to hire me," says Danziger. "She said I consider taking it off my resume."

Danziger stood firm, kept her degree intact on her resume and landed the job. "I would never dumb myself down."

Grossman says Danziger made the right move: "Any employer who has a problem with an Ivy League education, that's their problem, not yours." The same holds true for other credentials you've worked hard for and have every right to feel proud of.

As for Perry, the contract attorney, Piotrowski says to keep her Ph.D. on her resume, too. Rather than glossing over it, confront the "Ph.D. stigma" head-on by saying, "I like the challenge of proving my worth. I'm not expecting a piece of paper to do that for me. If you give me the chance, you can decide for yourself the value of what I bring to the organization."

10 Ways You're Dumbing Down Your Work Experience