Great Barrington is one of Berkshire County’s most popular year-round destinations: Spring and summer bring hikers; autumn attracts leaf-peepers; and winter draws skiers and snowboarders. Butternut Ski Area and Tubing Center, on the edge of East Mountain State Forest, is five minutes away by car, as is an access point to the Appalachian Trail.

Main Street, which runs alongside the Housatonic River, is lined with antiques stores and restaurants. It also has a theater dating to the early 1900s, which serves as a performing arts space, and a newer theater that shows independent films. Albany, N.Y., is about an hour away; Boston is a two-and-a-half-hour drive.

Size: 1,424 square feet

Price per square foot: $334

Indoors: From the street, a path runs from the sidewalk to the enclosed front porch. Just inside is the front door, which opens into a foyer. To the right is a sunny living room with original oak floors and windows overlooking the porch; to the left is a home office behind a barn-style sliding door.

Beyond the living room is a dining room with a bay window and enough space for a table seating six. Both the dining room and the foyer have access to the kitchen, which has updated appliances, a center island, a breakfast bar and the same oak floors that run through the living and dining rooms. To one side of the kitchen is a mudroom; to the other is a combination half bathroom and laundry room.

The primary bedroom is at the top of the stairs, with two street-facing windows and a good-sized closet. Across the hall are two bedrooms: one big enough for a queen-size bed and a smaller one that could serve as a playroom or nursery. The three bedrooms share a single bathroom with black-and-white tile floors and a combination tub and shower.

Outdoor space: The front porch and the mudroom have enough space for seating and wide windows from which to observe the property’s mature trees. A two-car garage is separate from the main house; behind it is a large backyard with a firepit and ample space for gathering.

Taxes: $6,552 (estimated)

Contact: Elle Villetto, William Pitt Sotheby’s International Realty, 413-717-7534; sothebysrealty.com

This house is in Deanwood, a section of Northeast Washington between the Anacostia River and the Maryland state line. The area is popular with first-time buyers, as many of the houses have backyards — a hot commodity in the city — and the Minnesota Avenue Metro Station is nearby, making for an easy commute to Capitol Hill.

A trail along the Watts Branch stream is a few blocks away and runs to the Anacostia River. Kenilworth Park and Aquatic Gardens, a National Park Service site with one of Washington’s largest remaining tidal marshes, is less than 10 minutes away by car.

Size: 1,440 square feet

Price per square foot: $330

Indoors: The house sits on an incline, with wood steps leading up to the covered porch. Across the threshold is a living-and-dining room with new wood floors and new paint, part of an extensive renovation done this year. The windows are also new, as is the insulation, and the lights can be controlled by Wi-Fi.

A dark blue accent wall runs from the living area at the front of the main level to a kitchen, at the back, with quartz counters, a herringbone-patterned tile backsplash and soft-close cabinets.

Both bedrooms are off the living room: The primary bedroom has another blue accent wall, as well as a porch-facing window; the attached bathroom has a shower with herringbone-patterned tile and cabinetry with goldtone hardware. The guest room has a ceiling fan and enough space for a double bed; next door is a full bathroom with blue cabinets, a marble-topped double vanity and a folding door that hides a washer and dryer.

A loft-like second level with windows on either end has plenty of room for a home-office setup.

Outdoor space: A deck in back, added during the renovation, steps down to a fenced yard. The deck is large enough to hold a dining table and a barbecue, and there is room for a garden in the yard.

Taxes: $1,956 (estimated)

Contact: Simon Sarver, Compass, 703-509-4300; compass.com

This property is nearly an acre, giving it a sense of privacy despite its proximity to downtown Little Rock, about 15 minutes away. River Mountain Park, popular with mountain bikers, is two miles away; a boat launch and a short bridge connect it to Two Rivers Park on the Arkansas River.

A shopping center with a grocery store and several casual restaurants is about a mile and a half away. Jefferson Elementary School, one of the highest-ranked in the state, is less than 10 minutes away, as is the University of Arkansas at Little Rock.

Size: 3,253 square feet

Price per square foot: $146

Indoors: The house is set back from the street, with a driveway on one side leading to a carport.

The double front doors open to a foyer with hardwood floors. To the left is an open living area with recessed lights, a fireplace framed by floor-to-ceiling brick and space for a dining table next to the sitting area.

The updated kitchen, which has white cabinetry and stainless-steel appliances, including a double oven, is separated from the dining area by a breakfast bar with more white cabinets. Off the kitchen is a combination home office and butler’s pantry; it has a washer and dryer, as well as a custom storage system with a gift-wrapping station.

Two bedrooms are on this level, off a hall that extends from the foyer. The primary suite has a walk-in closet and a bathroom with a deep soaking tub and a separate shower. Next door is a guest suite with its own bathroom.

The lower level, reached by stairs from the main hallway, has two more bedrooms and a full bathroom with a combination tub and shower, as well as a family room with backyard access.

Outdoor space: The backyard is relatively flat, and has a children’s play set with swings, a ladder and a trampoline. This part of the yard is surrounded by mature trees; some mature trees also line the driveway leading to the carport.

Taxes: $2,328 (estimated)

Contact: Cara Hazlewood, The Property Group, 501-993-3326; redfin.com