I almost didn’t read “What’s So Funny? A Cartoonist’s Memoir,” by David Sipress, because the shadow of the cartoonist Roz Chast’s pretty-much-perfect memoir “Can’t We Talk About Something More Pleasant?” (2014) loomed so largely — you might even say cartoonishly — over it. This would have been a terrible mistake.

Like Chast, Sipress contributes regularly to The New Yorker, if a little less recognizably: While her Edvard Munch-inflected characters are fuzzy and flushed with anxiety, he works mostly in amiable, economical black-and-white lines. Each author is a native New Yorker, the type, E.B. White once wrote, who “takes the city for granted and accepts its size and its turbulence as natural and inevitable,” imparting back to it “solidity and continuity.”

To this native New Yorker’s ears, something about those sentences — written, with all due respect, by a guy from Mount Vernon — has never quite rung true. None of us takes the city for granted! (Chast, now a part-timer, even wrote it a love letter of a book called “Going Into Town.”) And growing up buffeted by its size and its turbulence tends to produce, far from solidity, a certain tribally identifiable neurosis, a personal vibration, as if we were a set of once-nice towels that have gotten rumpled in a jumbo dryer.

Overprotective or authoritarian parents, a common species in New York well before the days of Find My iChild, make for extra wrinkles. Chast’s and Sipress’s books have in common evocative descriptions of less-than-happy childhoods, and the combination of discomfort and liberation as intimidating progenitors begin to lose their powers. Sipress’s anecdote about his mother, Estelle, giving him a Victrola record called “Safety Songs,” with ditties about never chasing a ball into the street, making sure to chew before one swallows, etc., veers particularly close to the Chast playbook. The city should commission these two to redesign the ubiquitous restaurant choking poster.

Chast’s book was a graphic memoir, told using her art; in Sipress’s book, his cartoons act more as punctuation marks to the narrative, written in prose that is also economical and amiable (and occasionally devastating). It’s like the difference between a through-composed opera and a musical.

The libretto here is full of admonishments: “don’t count your chickens” and “the proof is in the pudding.” And the sets are vintage urban topography from a simultaneously grimier and more glamorous New York, when no one cleaned up after their dogs, children were seen and not heard and Daddy unwound with a stiff Scotch on the rocks. It’s an endearingly vulnerable tale of being molded by one’s family of origin, then crawling out from under its suffocating weight.

Born in 1947, Sipress grew up with a sister six years older, Linda, in a 12th-floor apartment in a doorman building on West 79th Street with a view of treetops in Planetarium Park — then an attainable piece of real estate for a successful shopkeeper. Sipress’s father, Nathan, had escaped dirt floors and pogroms in Medzhybizh, Ukraine, via a horse cart and then a voyage crowded into steerage with four siblings, one of whom, hunchbacked, was almost turned away at Ellis Island until their determined mother intervened, “like a queen.” Nathan worked his way out of then untrendy Williamsburg, Brooklyn, up to owning Revere Jewelers, a block north of Bloomingdale’s, named for Paul Revere, the WASP-y echo a plus for a Jew trying to assimilate. The store was above a doll hospital, its patients “gazing dolefully down at the slow-moving downtown traffic on Lexington Avenue,” and his customers included Oscar Hammerstein, Richard Burton and Marilyn Monroe, who once pinched little David’s cheek.

Corporal punishment was common then, but spankings were usually administered by Estelle, a pint-size powerhouse of a homemaker who dedicated her life to ensuring her husband’s “peace of mind,” sacrificing her own youthful independence and suffering bad migraines in the process. Nathan’s inaugural wallop of his son, after the boy threw a bunch of his toys out the window, continued to sting for years. “Are you going to spank me for lying — not for dropping out?” thinks David in adulthood, after belatedly informing his parents that he’s ditched the master’s program in Harvard’s Department of Soviet Studies.

Suffice to say, neither the sculpture he pursued for a time, nor cartooning (even for The New Yorker), was what his parents had wished for him. Nathan would live to see a piece of David’s work accepted by the magazine, after 25 years of rejection, but not published.

There is a real dark shadow looming over the book in Linda, who urges her younger brother to hurl a turtle out behind the toys, and who readers quickly learn won’t survive the book either. In clinical terms, she was the identified patient of the family, and David the golden child, enjoined always to be a “good boy.” He develops a pattern of small, cinematic rebellion: spending his father’s hard-earned dollars on candy instead of a newspaper (and then lying about it); joining a high-school crowd whose pranks include dropping a box of detergent into the Plaza fountain, flooding Fifth Avenue with soap suds; punching out an old night watchman who tries to stop him from visiting a college girlfriend. His wife, Ginny, and a long-term therapist provide succor. He takes up meditation and yoga, which a teacher tells him will “still the fluctuations.”

But nothing quells his anxieties like coming up with the perfect combination of picture and text. “It’s a weird kind of sharing, to use that awful word, but it’s worked for me,” he writes. I have a feeling he’d hate the goopy word “storyteller” as well, but boy, he’s a good one.