FRENCH BRAIDBy Anne Tyler

In the opening pages of “French Braid,” a Baltimore college student spots a familiar-looking man in a train station. She suspects — but isn’t sure — that he is her first cousin Nicholas. Her uncertainty shocks her traveling companion — the boyfriend whose own close-knit family she has just met.

The roots of this familial distance are the central concern of “French Braid,” the 24th novel by the beloved Baltimore novelist Anne Tyler. Spanning 60 years and multiple generations, it offers a diffuse, affectionate portrait of the Garretts, a loving but aloof family in which nearly everything is left unsaid.

Our first glimpse of the Garrett clan comes in 1959, as the cousins’ grandparents, Robin and Mercy, take a rare family vacation with their children. Tyler proceeds to check in on them once every decade or so, always at some moment of transition. What emerges is a kind of forensic examination of Garrett family relations, a look at how their elliptical style of interaction came to be.

Tyler, who won the Pulitzer Prize in 1989, is at heart a 20th-century realist, a younger contemporary of John Updike, Richard Yates and Alice Munro. Like them, she is interested in the tension between freedom and intimacy, personal fulfillment and the demands of family life. Mercy Garrett is a frustrated artist who, after a year and a half of art school in Baltimore, shelved her dream of studying in Paris, married decent, reliable Robin and raised three children. Only after her youngest leaves for college do her aspirations resurface. Mercy rents a painting studio a few blocks away and quietly “leaves” Robin by gradually moving her possessions there. It’s a remarkable development, not least because it takes the rest of the family quite a while to catch on.

In fact, Mercy never admits that she and Robin have separated, not even to their children. Her new independence is too fragile. When her daughter confesses that her own marriage is on the rocks, Mercy panics: “She was ashamed to admit that her main concern was how to dissuade Lily from moving into the studio.” Mercy manages to dodge that bullet, only to get stuck taking care of her landlord’s cat. When he asks her to keep the cat permanently, she can’t bring herself to say no. She simply dumps it at an animal shelter when the landlord leaves town.

Mercy’s furtiveness — call it an extreme aversion to confrontation — is echoed across the generations. When her son, David, suddenly marries a colleague at the school where he teaches, he tells his family after the fact. His sister Lily conceals her third marriage from her own children. Eddie, a Garrett grandson, never gets around to telling the family he is gay.

For Tyler fans, this is familiar territory: the quotidian frictions and rewards of family life in white, middle-class Baltimore. But while her earlier novels were heavy on domestic details, vividly evoking the texture of daily life, “French Braid” is less fully imagined, the characters less developed. There are simply too many years to cover, too many children and grandchildren to keep track of. The younger Garretts are drawn haphazardly, or not at all.

Five decades into her career, one gets the sense that Tyler is no longer quite so interested in the details. Instead, “French Braid” offers something subtler and finer, the long view on family: what remains years later, when the particulars have been sanded away by time. The tone is wistful, elegiac. Watching his own children grow into adulthood, David experiences an exquisite sense of loss: “It was true that these days there happened to be two very dear grown-ups who were also named Emily and Nicholas, but they weren’t the same people. It was just as if those children had died. He’d been in mourning ever since.”

The novel’s emotional crescendo comes at Robin and Mercy’s 50th-anniversary party. (Twenty years after she moved out, they still haven’t told the kids.) Watching home movies with his disconnected, taciturn brood, Robin reflects: “Had there been some kind of limit, in those days, on how long a scene could last? Each one was so brief. … Pouf! And then goodbye. Goodbye to all of it. … It had flown by way too fast, he thought as the screen went blank. And he didn’t mean only the movie.”

“French Braid” is a novel about what is remembered, what we’re left with when all the choices have been made, the children raised, the dreams realized or abandoned. It is a moving meditation on the passage of time.

The novel ends on a poignant note, as David, now retired, finds himself unexpectedly awash in family intimacy when his son moves in with him during the pandemic. He is startled to recognize Garrett family traits in his 5-year-old grandson. “David’s father had raised his shoulders like that whenever he was intent on some task — a man Benny had never laid eyes on.” It leads him to recall the French braids his daughter wore as a child: “When she undid them, her hair would still be in ripples.”

David tells his wife: “That’s how families work, too. You think you’re free of them, but you’re never really free; the ripples are crimped in forever.”

The moment is vintage Tyler: the epiphany that will surprise no one, a clever rephrasing of conventional wisdom that merely affirms what we already believe. It’s why some (mostly male) critics have, over the years, dismissed her work as sentimental — the defining characteristic of the genre known as “women’s fiction.” It’s a publishing euphemism that carries more than a whiff of misogyny, implying that fiction written by and about women is by definition something less than literature — heartwarming rather than cerebral, reassuring rather than challenging. To be sure, over her long career Tyler has occasionally fallen into these traps. (See “A Patchwork Planet.”) But “French Braid” is the opposite of reassuring. The novel is imbued with an old-school feminism of a kind currently unfashionable. It looks squarely at the consequences of stifled female ambition — to the woman herself, and to those in her orbit.

For all its charm, “French Braid” is a quietly subversive novel, tacklinging fundamental assumptions about womanhood, motherhood and female aging. Contrary to the message of a thousand self-help books, Mercy’s efforts to begin a career at midlife are fruitless. She advertises her services in neighborhood grocery stores, on laundromat bulletin boards: “Let a Professional Artist Paint Your House’s Portrait.” After decades as a housewife, domestic life is her only subject.

In mourning the lost possibilities of Mercy’s life, Tyler takes aim at a sentimental trope deeply embedded in American culture. The feminist movement notwithstanding, popular culture (not to mention “women’s fiction”) still clings to the notion of motherhood as the ultimate emotional fulfillment, the great and crowning satisfaction of a woman’s life. For Mercy Garrett, that simply isn’t the case.