 CASTLES IN THEIR BONESBy Laura Sebastian514 pp. Delacorte. $18.99.(Ages 14 and up)

Sebastian, the author of the best-selling “Ash Princess” trilogy, returns with another dark fairy tale, this one about three royal sisters on a kingdom-building mission.

”Castles in Their Bones” takes place in the vaguely medieval continent of Vesteria, which is made up of four countries: Bessemia, Cellaria, Friv and Temarin. The countries are currently peaceful, but the ruthless Empress Margaraux of Bessemia wants to rule them all, and she’s willing to play a long game to ensure her success.

She has two tools at her disposal: magic and her children. While some of Vesteria’s rulers don’t approve of the use of stardust, a wish-granting powder made from cosmos, rumor has it that Margaraux used the precious stuff to conceive her children. As soon as her “star-touched” triplet princesses were born, the empress betrothed them to her neighboring countries’ apparent heirs in an act of fealty. But she secretly raised them as assassin-spies, trained in the lethal arts of poison and politics. Now 16 years old, they are ready to assume their fated roles: Once they are safely enthroned, the girls will work to throw their respective countries into chaos, allowing their mother to claim each kingdom with ease. But the princesses quickly realize they are not like their Medean matriarch — they develop troublesome feelings of love and kindness that begin to offset their ingrained mercilessness.

When Margaraux discovers that her girls have disobeyed her, she unleashes the full potency of her icy fury, and the results are devastating. However, a clandestine meeting with an old enemy in the concluding chapter reveals that Margaraux has vulnerable secrets of her own, setting the stage for an inevitable sequel.

Despite its bloodthirsty premise, “Castles” is actually quite mild. Like a feudal “Bridgerton” without the sex, there is flirting, some longing looks and even a few kisses, but none of the marriages are consummated, and most of the violence takes place off page, which left this reader, initially excited and intrigued by the plot’s sexy, gory promise, a bit bereft. But for those who prefer a PG rating, the unambiguous storytelling and accessible prose make “Castles” a perfect steppingstone to the more intricately plotted and plushier works of Robin LaFevers or Sarah J. Maas.

LAKELOREBy Anna-Marie McLemore294 pp. Feiwel & Friends. $18.99.(Ages 13 and up)

McLemore’s own experience of being Mexican American, nonbinary and dyslexic deeply informs the reflective characters and rich symbolism of their lyrical new novel, “Lakelore.”

The novel follows Bastián and Lore, two nonbinary trans teenagers drawn together not only by their shared identities but also by their communal ability to see into the underwater world of a mythical local lake rumored to be imbued with mysterious powers. Almost a third character itself, the lake is populated by creatures known as alebrijes, colorful Mexican folkloric sculptures of imaginary animals. Bastián created the alebrije — each time they were frustrated by their A.D.H.D. symptoms, they created one alebrije sculpture and put it in the lake, and the water brought them to life. The lake is also tinted by multicolored paint samples that Lore swirled into the waves as part of a personal ritual to cleanse themself of the bad memories of a brutal fight with a bully over their dyslexia.

But now Bastián and Lore’s daily lives are being disrupted by wild rainbow visions from their fantasy world. Water floods family rooms, “the sea plants coming out of the supply drawers.” Each privately believes that the shameful secrets they released into the water are the reason the lake has burst its boundaries. Unless they are brave enough to trust each other with their hidden pain, they will remain trapped in the deluge of watery visions.

McLemore poignantly uses magical realism to explore gender identity and neurodiversity, an approach that will help trans teenagers feel seen and enable all readers to understand the layered and complex aspects of learning differences. While the motives of the magic system are occasionally muddy, McLemore’s empathetic descriptions of how Bastián experiences their A.D.H.D. and how Lore understands their dyslexia couldn’t be more clear. Like Lore, who defiantly states, “I am a brown girl, just like I’m a brown boy, just like I’m both and neither, in different proportions depending on the day,” “Lakelore” celebrates the strength and imprecise elegance of claiming your own truth.

THIS WOVEN KINGDOMBy Tahereh Mafi495 pp. HarperCollins. $19.99. (Ages 13 and up)

Forbidden romance steams up the pages of this Persian mythology-inspired fantasy series opener.

In “This Woven Kingdom,” Mafi — best known for her Y.A. dystopian thriller series “Shatter Me” and, more recently, her National Book Award-nominated novel “A Very Large Expanse of Sea” — creates a luxurious, saffron-scented world, where devils whisper unwelcome prophecies and princes fall in love with ice-eyed Jinn.

The story, which is steeped in aspects of Islamic and Iranian culture, follows two teenagers: Alizeh and Kamran. In Ardunia’s bustling capital city, Alizeh is a lonely servant who scrubs toilets by day and stitches dresses for royalty by night. She wears a snoda, or head and face covering, not only as designation of her lowly status but also to hide her exceptional beauty and disturbingly pale blue eyes. In truth, Alizeh is actually a Jinn of royal birth living in hiding until she can reclaim her throne from the Clay — humans who have forced her people to suppress their supernatural talents and bend to human law. Meanwhile, Kamran is a reluctant Clay prince about to ascend the Ardunian throne. He’s a warrior who would rather engage in battle than politics.

When Kamran witnesses the aftermath of a street attack on Alizeh, in which she deftly disarms her assailant, he is so intrigued that he seeks her out. After meeting, they quickly form a connection that is so passionate, it could destroy souls and topple kingdoms, but the chasm between their social classes makes it all but impossible to admit their love for each other.

Hopeless romantics will relish the euphoric agony of anticipation as they watch these fated lovers sort through their feelings. But while Alizeh and Kamran’s relationship develops, Mafi treats readers to sumptuous world-building. Like an intricate Islamic flower mural, Mafi’s story expands deliberately, each small revelation rising from the one before, delivering deeply satisfying epiphanies at the end of each chapter. After several misunderstandings, some double crosses and a very heated make-out session, Alizeh and Kamran finally come together only to be torn apart in a jaw-dropping cliffhanger. The wait for a return ticket to this exquisite kingdom is made bearable only by flipping to the front and repeating your first visit.