We’re at the scene of the crime. Stockholm, Sweden. Two men — Ludo and Daniel — stand by a portable sauna mounted on a trailer bed. “So, you were in here?” Daniel says, pointing forcefully. “And they just took it from you?” Ludo confirms. “Oh, my God,” Daniel says, turning to the camera in the manner of someone practiced at generating on-the-scene narration for viewers at home: “Crazy story. You go to the sauna. You’re relaxing inside. And the next thing you know, your bike, which is parked next to you, just gets stolen. Double-locked, they carried it away.” He’s visibly peeved: This can’t stand. “Nah. Let’s find this bike.”

Welcome to “Bike Hunters,” a YouTube series produced by VanMoof, a Dutch e-bike company. When you buy a VanMoof, starting at $2,298, you can also subscribe to a theft-protection package. If your bike is stolen, VanMoof will either recover it within two weeks — possibly by sending Daniel or another “hunter” — or replace it. Each VanMoof comes with an electronic tracking system designed to make it easier to find. I’ve watched VanMoof’s bike hunters, tracking devices in hand, traipsing through cities all over the world — Berlin, San Francisco, London, Tokyo — following signals to street corners, basements, scrap-metal sites and tent cities. (The series bumps up against urban poverty and homelessness, but tends to restrict itself to thinking about them in terms of bike security.) Often the hunters themselves cruise from clue to clue on VanMoofs, showing off the bikes’ sleek design and the benefits of giving your pedaling an electronic boost.

Sometimes the hunters find the bike chained up — or parked in a specialized structure that may, to American viewers, look like something from another world — and liberate it with a power cutter. Sometimes they confront the bike’s new “owner,” always possibly the thief himself, but perhaps just someone who got a deal they might have known was too good to be true. (“I bought it for 10 euros,” one man says, shrugging.) Whatever happens, the story is told in the grammar of reality TV. Quick-cut montages boil hours of searches and stakeouts down to mere minutes, backed by techno music that makes the hunts feel consistently adrenalized. The hunters speak in narrative beats: “Let’s find this bike. ... We were waiting for this bike to move, and it just moved. ... We have to go right now!”

In Stockholm, Daniel and Ludo follow the tracker signal to a group of apartment buildings. As they interview residents, Daniel picks up “super tense” energy from a man who runs off before they can approach him. Searching the area, they spot a telltale VanMoof handlebar sticking out from a balcony. Daniel uses a digital signal to verify it’s Ludo’s bike, then calls the police, who help recover it. Overjoyed, Ludo hops on and begins riding.

“Bike Hunters” takes a product category with massive potential to increase the public good, then talks about it in a surprisingly goofy way: via reality-TV-inflected short videos about young people executing what sometimes seem like awfully inefficient retrieval operations. (In two early episodes, several VanMoof employees flew from the Netherlands to Ukraine and Romania, spending days, and significant amounts of carbon, on the trails of bikes they never found.) The show can be a little silly. It’s for exactly this reason that it feels terribly important.

Consider cars, the core of the problem e-bikes promise to help solve. Much of cars’ dominance of United States transit culture stems from the accumulated power of a century of political decisions. But some credit must also be given to the car’s great success at infiltrating every crevice of our culture. Cars come to us in advertisements, in films, in song lyrics; they’re powerful, they’re sexy, they’re fun.

Bicycles, by contrast — the everyday, getting-from-A-to-B type — are offered as the vegetables to cars’ steak. Prudent and responsible, maybe. Powerful and sexy, definitely not. Ditto for the likes of public transit and walkable neighborhoods, options often presented in the sober register of a nonprofit report. There’s talk of safety, public health and the negatives we might avoid: death and injury counts, toxic emission figures, congestion statistics. We hear about fun and pleasure only in footnotes and asides, if at all. This dynamic applies far beyond transit. Eating less meat, buying less clothing, wearing masks indoors during a disease outbreak: Too often, demonstrably good interventions arrive via scolding exhortations to eat our vegetables, both real and metaphorical. Not because the vegetables are tasty, but because eating steak is bad for the planet and we should know better.

Psychologists distinguish between “avoidance motivation” (which steers us away from threats) and “approach motivation” (which guides us toward rewards), stressing the need for individuals to balance the two. People who drink too much, for example, might have a better chance of changing if they can, in addition to understanding alcohol’s negative toll on their life, envision how drinking less could add positives, like better relationships with loved ones. “If I can’t dance, I don’t want to be in your revolution,” the anarchist Emma Goldman is often quoted as saying. In fact, the phrase seems to have been coined by an activist printing T-shirts for a fund-raiser, but the point stands: Surely we need more to look forward to than the avoidance of worst-case scenarios.

In its own small way, “Bike Hunters” offers a hint of how to gaze forward. Importantly, it exists not to make you feel bad but to make you want a fancy bike — to see a bike as an aspirational good, more steak than vegetable, something you would be crushed to have stolen. The episodes are littered with scenes of bike-​related happiness. A crowd gathered on an Amsterdam street cheers while hunters grind the lock off a stolen bike. A Moroccan medical student who learns he has bought a stolen bike invites the hunters in for tea, signs up to be a hunter himself and gets a free bike as a thank-you. We see how pleased VanMoof owners are to have their bikes recovered, as if getting pieces of their lives back. In my favorite episodes, the hunt showcases the everyday pleasures and conveniences of bikeable streets and bike-friendly spaces. We see bikes everywhere, woven into the fabric of neighborhood life. It always looks like something worth working toward. Yes, the way the show whistles past the radical inequalities of urban life can be annoying. (Though it’s nothing compared with, say, media coverage of carjacking.) But it would be a mistake to let this discredit its entire method. The lens is a powerful one; it just needs to be widened.

Since watching the Stockholm episode, hardly a week has gone by in which I haven’t imagined how wonderful it would be to feel safe biking to a sauna, emerging refreshed and biking off again into the rest of my day. After Ludo has his bike back, he and Daniel head to downtown Stockholm for karaoke. Daniel sings ABBA’s “Super Trouper”: “Smiling, having fun/Feeling like a number one.” Ludo opts for “Feeling Good,” a song used often in commercials for cars, including the 2022 Toyota Tundra pickup. “It’s a new dawn,” it says. “It’s a new day, it’s a new life.”