After pulling off a notable second act of reinvention, the Canaans, in Litchfield County, Conn., may be on the verge of a third.

For centuries, the neighboring towns of Canaan and North Canaan rumbled with iron foundries that turned out wagon wheels, anchors and cannons. But in digging mines, firing furnaces and stripping the hills of trees — all for the important ingredient of charcoal — the industry had left the terrain ragged by the early 20th century.

The area’s gritty past seems hard to believe today. Strolling down roads that run past cliffs and through valleys, one is struck by the quiet, clear-aired and woodsy landscape.

But as the countryside healed, the housing market was often soft. Farther from New York City than getaways like Roxbury, Conn., the Canaans saw some properties languish on the market for years while shoppers headed to trendier destinations like Millerton, N.Y., causing small business districts to wither.

Then came the upheaval of the pandemic — and the increasing appeal of property farther from city centers as remote work became the new normal for many. In the once-too-remote Canaans, a burst of interest from buyers has raised property values, spurred new restaurants and stores, and contributed to the sense of a new era.

“A lot of people came up during Covid and never left,” said William Betts, 59, a visual artist who relocated in 2020 from Miami Beach with his wife, Veronica Beach, 43, a producer of Super Bowl commercials. “And I can talk with those neighbors about artificial intelligence or the media business. It’s the kind of conversation you might have in Manhattan.”

Covid was a big factor in the couple’s move. Upset with the way Florida officials handled the crisis, they soured on the Sunshine State. Another impetus was Mr. Betts’s desire to help an immunocompromised sister in New York who was terrified of getting sick and eager for more space.

After searching in nearby Kent and Cornwall, the couple came across an 18-acre former farm next to a mountain in Canaan. The house has two distinct wings, one from 1748 and the other Civil War-era; Mr. Betts and Ms. Beach are in one side, and Mr. Betts’s sister is in the other. The property, which cost $823,000, includes two barns, both partially converted to work spaces.

Scarce inventory, a familiar story, has made hunting difficult. Mr. Betts lucked upon his house, which had lingered on the market for a decade, he said, because of its unusual layout. Previous owners had carved out six bedrooms to house groomers for a nearby equestrian business. (A renovation has reduced the bedroom count to three.)

A willingness to take on fixer-uppers seems key to successful house hunting in the area. Last summer, a North Carolina couple, Brent Jenkins, a former artist, and Carol Jenkins, a retired library director, both 75, paid $225,000 for a vintage two-family house in Canaan that they are converting into a single-family.

Paving the way for them was their daughter, Caitlin Jenkins, 45, an art conservator, and her husband, Jason Bailer Losh, 44, a sculptor and art installer, who relocated to Canaan from Los Angeles in 2019 with their two young children when the cost of living in California became untenable, Mr. Losh said. After considering Rhinebeck, N.Y, the family ended up in more-affordable Canaan, which is still relatively close to his installation business in New York. Now they own a gabled Victorian on a corner lot with a carriage house, which they bought for an “insane” $255,000, Mr. Losh said.

The most surprising aspect of living in Canaan, though, has been discovering fellow creatives, he said, which has convinced him that one doesn’t have to suffer in a cramped apartment for the sake of art. “If something is going to happen in New York or L.A., it’s going to happen whether or not I’m there,” Mr. Losh said. “Moving here was the best decision we’ve ever made.”

The best-known Canaan in Connecticut is probably New Canaan, a bedroom community in Fairfield County that has little in common with its similarly named counterparts 70 miles north.

The side-by-side Canaans, with a total of 4,300 residents across 52 square miles, are more rural, affordable and spacious — even with the influx of weekenders.

Part of a single town before a split in 1858, North Canaan and Canaan are subtly different. North Canaan (which, confusingly, is often referred to as Canaan) has more of a blue-collar feel. In fact, there are still active quarries, including one, behind a Stop & Shop supermarket, that produces bright-white limestone used for pool caulk.

Queen Anne and Italianate-style homes with wide porches line West Main Street, while North Elm Street has a more modest stock of younger Capes and ranches.

North Canaan’s several-block commercial hub, at the junction of busy Routes 44 and 7, is known locally as Canaan Village. It’s part of a National Register historic district that has been marred in past years by empty storefronts. But in recent months, a smattering of new businesses have arrived, including a yoga studio, a market offering “organic fair trade” coffee, and Industry Kitchen & Bar, which opened in a building with an eye-catching black facade that wouldn’t look out of place in Brooklyn.

Also adding a twinkle to the streetscape is Tenuta, a small grocery store offering imported Italian specialties. Ian Edwards, 33, a fashion publicist from Park Slope, Brooklyn, opened the store last year with a friend, Travis Powell, around the same time he bought a house up the road — a four-bedroom, two-bath 1762 farmhouse with a barn on 32 acres, for which he paid $455,000.

“For years, North Canaan was considered the working-girl sister to wealthier enclaves like Salisbury,” Mr. Edwards said. “But why not Canaan? All roads lead through there.”

Less populated and wealthier Canaan has its own confusing nickname: Falls Village. Its heart, clustered around Main and Railroad Streets by a frothy section of the Housatonic River, offers closely spaced Greek Revival and Second Empire houses near a handful of independent stores and restaurants. Among them is Falls Village Cafe, which serves burgers on most days, but Hungarian dishes like goulash on Fridays.

Buyers seeking bigger spreads might consider Under Mountain Road, where tiny waterfalls tumble between large, sloped yards. Much of the land nearby has been conserved, and Great Mountain Forest and Housatonic State Forest are laced with hiking trails.

Earlier this month, the two towns had a total of 18 single-family houses for sale, according to Zillow. At the high end was Fox Hollow Farm, a 67-acre former hunting lodge listed for $2.5 million (an increase from $1.5 million in 2020). The least expensive was a three-bedroom ranch listed for $215,000.

Prices have soared. In 2019, 33 single-family homes sold in North Canaan at an average price of $207,000, according to data from David Mallison, an agent with William Pitt Sotheby’s International Realty. In 2021, 40 sold at an average price of $329,000 — an increase of nearly 60 percent.

In Canaan, there were 22 sales in 2019, at an average price of $294,000; in 2021, 17 properties sold for an average of $532,000, a surge of more than 80 percent.

A vicious circle is gripping the market, brokers say. Homeowners are afraid to sell because they worry about finding a new place, which is worsening the supply shortage. “People don’t have anywhere to go that is affordable,” Mr. Mallison said. “But it’s also really nice here, so why leave?”

One symbol of the area’s revitalization is Canaan Union Station, a brightly painted board-and-batten train station from 1872 that was almost destroyed by a fire in 2001. A planned restoration languished for years. But in 2018, the landmark finally reopened, and now it has three tenants: a railroad museum; Great Falls Brewing Company, which offers craft beers and dart nights; and the seven-month-old New England Accordion Connection and Museum Company, where visitors are welcome to come in and just play.

“This town is really trying to grow,” said Angelo Paul Ramunni, the owner of the accordion store, who lived in North Canaan from 1982 until 2019, when he moved to a single-level home with fewer stairs in nearby Salisbury.

There are plans afoot to restore passenger train service, which ended in 1971. Trains that now run from New York to Danbury would continue on through Canaan to the next-door Berkshires, ending in Pittsfield, Mass. But one doesn’t have to cross the border for Berkshires-type cultural attractions. Canaan has its own scaled-down version of Tanglewood: Music Mountain, which offers seasonal chamber music.

A lower-key presence is the Appalachian Trail, which skirts Canaan’s retail area. More of the trail used to slice through town before a federal relocation project in the 1980s. The old leg is now the blue-signed Mohawk Trail; Dean’s Ravine waterfalls are a highlight.

Each town has a public school that serves students in kindergarten through eighth grade.

At North Canaan Elementary School, which enrolls 250 students, 82 percent are white and 13 percent Latino, according to state data. On the state’s Smarter Balanced assessment exams in 2019, 67 percent of students met standards in English, versus 60 percent statewide, and 65 percent met standards in math, versus 63 percent statewide.

The Lee H. Kellogg School in Canaan is smaller and less diverse, with about 70 students, all of whom identify as white, according to state data. In 2019, 64 percent met state standards in English and 67 percent met standards in math.

Housatonic Valley Regional High School, a columned 1939 building on a former farm in Canaan, serves the two towns, along with four others, enrolling 320 students. In 2020, the graduation rate was 91 percent, compared with 89 percent statewide, and 70 percent of the students went on to college, versus 72 percent statewide.

Nearby private options are the Hotchkiss School, a coed boarding and day high school, and Salisbury School, a boys-only version. Indian Mountain School offers prekindergarten through ninth grade.

The closest train station is in Wassaic, N.Y., at the end of the Harlem line of Metro-North Railroad, a drive of about 25 to 40 minutes.

On weekday mornings, there are four trains to Grand Central Terminal between 6 a.m. and noon; all require a transfer, except for the 6:28. The trip takes a little over two hours; a 10-trip pass is $273.

Few traces of the iron industry remain. Round clearings can be found in the woods where huge wood piles were burned for charcoal. The industrial structures of Amesville, a factory village that straddled the Housatonic in Canaan, are mostly gone, despite a huge claim to fame: They made the largest cannon of the Civil War, a 19,500-pound behemoth. But the war ended before it could be deployed.

More tangible is Beckley Furnace Industrial Monument, on the Blackberry River, the only state park in Connecticut with a manufacturing focus. Once a sprawling collection of ramshackle buildings, the iron-making plant is now basically just a chimney with Gothic-arched chambers that give it a church-steeple look.

The first person with a forge on the Blackberry, in the mid-1700s, was Samuel Forbes, a blacksmith known as the Iron Prince, for the numerous cannons he made during the American Revolution. Forbes’s house, at 89 Lower Road, is on the National Register of Historic Places and once hosted Benedict Arnold.