The move came amid growing restrictions on travel and entertainment across China as the government tries to stamp out the Omicron variant.

Disney will temporarily close its resort in Shanghai from Monday in response to China’s rising numbers of Covid cases, the company announced.

The move reflected the growing restrictions on travel and entertainment across China as the government tries to stamp out the emerged of the Omicron variant of the coronavirus under its strict “zero Covid” policy. The country is facing its worst Covid-19 surge since the coronavirus first emerged in the city of Wuhan. On Saturday, it reported its first deaths from the virus in more than a year.

The Shanghai Disney Resort, which includes Shanghai Disneyland, Disneytown and Wishing Star Park, said any decision on a reopening date would be made after consulting with the local authorities. Shanghai Disneyland closed as the virus spread throughout China in early 2020 and reopened in May that year.

China recorded 2,027 confirmed coronavirus cases on Sunday, with 1,947 local transmissions, including more than 1,000 in the hard-hit northeast province of Jilin, where the two Covid deaths were reported on Saturday. Jilin banned its 24 million residents from leaving the province or traveling between cities because of the surging case numbers there.

Major commercial cities, including Shanghai and Shenzhen, have also closed schools and offices in some areas, and transport problems have strained supply chains. Last week, China’s leader, Xi Jinping, urged officials to try to limit the economic fallout even as they rushed to stifle outbreaks.

While cities in Jilin continue to enforce stringent controls in many areas, Shenzhen, which is next to Hong Kong, announced that from Monday it would start adjusting restrictions to allow as many as employees and businesses to get back to work. Couriers, taxi drivers and building laborers in many areas could use a daily testing system to return to work, the city’s government said.

In other global news:

Germany dropped nearly all Covid rules on social distancing, indoor mask wearing and test and vaccine requirements on Sunday. But as a rise in cases has continued to break records in recent days, most states have delayed scrapping restrictions until the beginning of April.

South Korea said that, starting on Monday, most international travelers who had received a booster shot or had been fully vaccinated within the past six months can enter without having to quarantine. Previously, all inbound passengers were subject to a seven-day isolation period. Arrivals from Ukraine, Pakistan, Uzbekistan and Myanmar will still be required to quarantine.

Two Sunday matches in the Oceania qualifiers for the FIFA World Cup in Qatar — between the Cook Islands and Tahiti, and Vanuatu and the Solomon Islands — were canceled after several athletes tested positive for the coronavirus, the Oceania Football Confederation said. The “vast majority” of Vanuatu’s team tested positive, and it has since withdrawn from the tournament.

Hong Kong announced on Monday that it would lift its ban on flights from nine countries on April 1, just one of the restrictions it plans to relax as experts and government officials say the worst of an Omicron-driven wave might have passed.

Hong Kong’s leader, Carrie Lam, said on Monday that vaccinated residents would only have to quarantine for seven days, down from 14, upon arrival from overseas. The isolation for travelers had been one of the strictest in the world and had discouraged many from returning to the Chinese territory of 7.4 million people.

She also suspended plans to have every person in the city undergo P.C.R. testing and moved up a deadline to receive booster shots to May 31. The extra dose will be necessary to enter public places, including supermarkets and shopping malls.

For most of the pandemic, Hong Kong has sealed itself off from the rest of the world and required travelers to quarantine for as long as three weeks in a hotel, mirroring policies in mainland China.

Then, as the Omicron variant spread rapidly across the world early this year, the government banned flights from the United States, Australia, Britain, Canada, France, India, Nepal, Pakistan and the Philippines in an attempt to keep virus numbers close to zero. When flights resume from those nine countries in April, only vaccinated residents will be eligible to return.

Even though the new measures remain some of the strictest in the world, Hong Kong’s approach appears to be diverging slightly from that of mainland China. Two of China’s largest cities, Shanghai and Shenzhen, remain in lockdown, and millions of residents there are required to undergo P.C.R. testing in an effort to bring case numbers back to zero.

More than 5,000 people have died from Covid in Hong Kong, and more than one million cases have been recorded since January. Researchers estimate that nearly half of the city may have been infected by the virus.

The lifting of flight bans comes at the behest of experts, including Gabriel Leung, dean of the University of Hong Kong, who said last month that residents are more at risk of infection from community transmissions than from imported cases.

The Hong Kong government has lurched from one policy to another in tackling the fast-moving Omicron outbreak. Mrs. Lam, the city’s leader, said Monday that she would suspend plans for mandatory coronavirus testing, weeks after rumors of a concurrent lockdown triggered waves of panic buying and an exodus from the city.

Schools were closed for an early “summer holiday” in February, in part because officials planned to use campuses for mass testing sites. Mrs. Lam said there was no longer a “road map” to conduct mass testing with the outbreak still raging, but she would not rule out that option in the future.

Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the Biden administration’s top adviser on the pandemic, predicted on Sunday an “uptick” in coronavirus infections similar to the current increase in Europe, despite the current decline in cases, hospitalizations and deaths in the United States.

It is “no time at all to declare victory, because this virus has fooled us before and we really must be prepared for the possibility that we might get another variant,” Dr. Fauci said on ABC’s “This Week.” “And we don’t want to be caught flat-footed on that.”

While anticipating a new rise, Dr. Fauci said that at this time he does not expect a surge. Still, the BA.2 subvariant has been shown to be a more contagious version of the Omicron variant, though it, too, causes less-severe illness in most people.

Epidemiologists have said the current lull in U.S. cases mirrors the dip that Europe enjoyed before many officials in the region relaxed restrictions like indoor masking.

Even as U.S. case numbers continue to fall to levels reminiscent of last summer, BA.2 variant infections are making up a greater share of them. That proportion ranges from about 20 percent in the Midwest to 39 percent in New York and New Jersey, according to data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

With cases remaining low, Dr. Fauci said he doesn’t currently see the nation ramping up restrictions, “but you always have to have the flexibility.” He also cautioned that restrictions could come back into play if hospitalizations begin to rise.

About 65 percent of Americans are vaccinated, Dr. Fauci noted, and about half of the people eligible for a booster have gotten the shot. He said it remains critical for Congress to continue funding the tests, treatments and booster shots that may soon be in greater need.

Federal officials have already said that a stalled aid package for coronavirus countermeasures means that monoclonal antibody shipments to states will slow by about 30 percent this week and that orders for more antiviral pills are on hold.

Dr. Vivek Murthy, the U.S. surgeon general, echoed Dr. Fauci’s call for congressional funding for those anti-viral treatments and antibody infusions so they are available if needed in greater quantities.

He declined to predict an immediate surge in an interview on “Fox News Sunday,” saying the cases in Europe tend to presage those in the United States, and that Americans can expect to see rises and falls. He urged the nation to focus on “preparation, not panic.”

“We’re in that mile 18 of a marathon,” Dr. Murthy said. “We can’t quit, because Covid’s not quitting.”

Some states will close mass coronavirus testing sites in the coming weeks, as many did before the recent Omicron surge, despite concerns among some public health experts that the United States may be unprepared for a new wave of cases.

The closures arrive only a few months after Americans were forced to wait hours in long lines for free tests or to pay for testing. New Hampshire closed all state-run sites on Tuesday. Massachusetts will have closed a majority by April 1. South Carolina has been gradually closing them this month; Utah has been doing so since February.

State health departments have cited sharp drops in demand for testing as a critical factor in their decisions, as well as a significant improvement in the availability of at-home rapid tests and declines in daily cases and hospitalizations, which have been recorded in nearly every state.

Many states have shifted testing efforts back to traditional health care providers, like hospitals and pharmacies. But some public health experts say that closing mass testing sites without taking other steps to address potential gaps in virus surveillance and testing access, especially while other mitigation measures like mask mandates are dropped, could leave the country scrambling in the face of another potential surge.

Testing sites provide health officials with data to anticipate new surges and variants in a way that at-home rapid tests cannot. (Though a critical tool in fighting the pandemic, at-home results are not always reported to official authorities.)

Once a new surge or variant arrives and starts driving up testing demand, no rush to reopen mass testing sites, no matter how expedited, can make up for the lost time, said Cassandra Pierre, the medical director of public health programs at Boston Medical Center.

For instance, Colorado health officials have said they could reopen mass testing sites within four to five weeks. In that time, Dr. Pierre said, the peak of a surge may have already passed and left hospitals overwhelmed with severely ill patients.

Even reopening testing sites in as little as one to two weeks would not be sufficient, Dr. Pierre said.

Closing state-run sites also requires local hospitals, pharmacies and community-based groups to absorb the additional demand. Those that are already straining to serve populations most in need may not be able to do so, Dr. Pierre said.

Still, state health departments have been under unsustainable strain. Federal funding is dwindling, and more money may not be coming. Staff shortages and death threats have become commonplace.

The testing site closures may have been inevitable given the enormous stressors on the public health work force, said Gigi Gronvall, a testing expert at Johns Hopkins University.

There are positive signs. Private providers are better prepared than they previously have been, Dr. Gronvall said, and increased immunity in the general population and the widespread availability of rapid tests will help.

She added that the sites are not the only way for health departments to monitor or address a potential surge. But the question remains: What happens if the virus takes a turn for the worse? Or if a variant emerges for which existing vaccines aren’t protective?

“You don’t want to fearmonger, but this is part of planning,” Dr. Gronvall said. “This is the kind of thing that public health departments need to be thinking about.”

Austria will reintroduce an indoor mask mandate, the health minister, Johannes Rauch, announced on Friday, bucking a trend among European countries to lift coronavirus precautions despite rising cases.

“It was simply necessary to take countermeasures now,” Mr. Rauch said at a news conference on Friday, just weeks after Austria lifted its mask mandates in most indoor spaces.

Earlier this month, Austrian officials had announced that the nation’s general vaccine mandate would be temporarily suspended. It recently took official effect, but enforcement had not begun. About 74 percent of Austrians are fully vaccinated, according to the Our World in Data.

But Mr. Rauch said that experts have now corrected forecasts for the trajectory of the virus and that officials were concerned about staffing and the availability of beds in hospitals and retirement and nursing homes.

Starting on Wednesday, FFP2 masks (Europe’s equivalent to American N95s) will be required in indoor spaces again, and the government would soon revise the isolation rules for infected people, the Ministry of Social Affairs, Health, Care and Consumer Protection said in a statement on Friday.

A highly transmissible Omicron subvariant, BA.2, is contributing to the new surge around Europe this month. Although deaths have continued to fall in the region, the number of Covid patients in hospitals has risen in some European countries such as the United Kingdom, Ireland, and Austria, according to Our World in Data.

Over the past two weeks, new cases in Austria have increased by 54 percent, according to the Center for Systems Science and Engineering at Johns Hopkins University.

But European countries have nonetheless been pushing to reopen. Last month, Denmark dropped all its restrictions, including a mask mandate in indoor spaces and on public transportation. The British government has ended all remaining legal coronavirus curbs in England, including the legal requirement for infected people to isolate. On Thursday, Italy announced it would progressively lift its vaccination and health pass requirements.

But as countries greeted the end of many precautions, Austria’s announcement was a concerning signal that momentum in that direction may have been premature. Mr. Rauch said that earlier policy changes were based on predictions that cases would be dropping by now.

“That has not come true. It has changed, and changed significantly,” he said.

When the coronavirus first swept across China in early 2020, the country’s leader, Xi Jinping, declared a “people’s war” against the epidemic, launching what would become a no-holds-barred strategy to eliminate infections.

Now, in year three of the pandemic, and faced with the rise of a stealthy and rapidly spreading variant, Mr. Xi is trying to fine-tune the playbook, ordering officials to quash outbreaks — but also to limit the economic pain involved.

As China grapples with the country’s largest outbreak since the pandemic began in Wuhan more than two years ago, Beijing says its measures should be more precise in scope. Officials are now promoting policies that to much of the world might either seem obvious, such as allowing the use of at-home test kits, or still extreme, such as sending people to centralized isolated facilities instead of hospitals.

But in China, where no effort has been spared to stamp out the virus, these point to a notable shift. Last week, for the first time, Mr. Xi urged officials to reduce the impact of the country’s Covid response on people’s livelihoods.

The adjustments are largely out of necessity. So far, the number of cases remains relatively low, and only two deaths have been reported in the latest wave. But many of the more than 32,000 cases reported across two dozen provinces in recent weeks have been of the highly transmissible BA.2 subvariant of Omicron.

The mushrooming of outbreaks around the country could quickly overwhelm the medical system if every person who tested positive were sent to a hospital, as was required until recently. It could wear down the armies of community workers and neighborhood volunteers tasked with organizing mass PCR tests for millions of people every day and checking on residents under quarantine. Lengthy, unpredictable lockdowns could wipe out the already razor-thin profits of many factories or lead to layoffs of service workers.

In his remarks to top officials last week, Mr. Xi said officials should strive for “maximum effect” with “minimum cost” in controlling the virus, reflecting concerns about the economy’s slowing growth. Yet his order to swiftly contain the outbreaks underscored a broader question about how far his rhetoric on controlling costs would go. On Friday, Chinese health officials emphasized to reporters that the effort to be more targeted did not amount to a relaxing of the policy.

Dali Yang, a professor of political science at the University of Chicago, said Mr. Xi was signaling a “willingness to adapt and to reduce the disruptions to the economy,” but not that the government was giving up control.

The ruling Communist Party’s zero-tolerance approach creates high costs for officials should outbreaks occur under their watch, Mr. Yang said, pointing to the recent firings of top officials in Jilin City and a district in the city of Changchun as examples. State media reported that more than two dozen officials had been dismissed in recent weeks, accused of negligence in responding to the outbreaks.

For many in China, everyday life has been upended since the latest wave began. Tens of millions of people are now under some form of lockdown. Factories have suspended work and truck traffic has been delayed, snarling already frayed supply chains. In some areas of the major metropolises of Shenzhen and Shanghai, life has ground to a halt as offices and schools have been shuttered and residents have been ordered to stay in their homes.

In Shanghai, the authorities have avoided imposing a citywide lockdown, using contact tracing instead to contain neighborhoods deemed high-risk. Still, the restrictions have hit the bottom line for businesses, such as a spicy hot pot restaurant in the upscale Xuhui district of Shanghai.

Zhang Liang, the owner of the restaurant, said his profits had plunged by more than 80 percent since the lockdowns began. He was worried about his bills.

“We’re still open, but no one is coming,” Mr. Zhang said.

The lockdown is taking a toll on residents in other ways. Tang Min, a 37-year-old gas station worker in a town in Jilin Province, was among residents ordered to stay at home. Days later, she was running out of the prescription medicine she takes to treat her depression.

She called the local government hotline, and neighborhood volunteers eventually brought her more medicine, just before she would have run out.

“When I don’t take medicine, I don’t feel like I have much to live for,” Ms. Tang said in a telephone interview. 

China’s stringent virus controls still appear to enjoy widespread support, with people hoping to avoid the devastation Covid has wrought on hospitals and communities around the world. But in recent weeks, there have been signs that the public’s patience is wearing thin.

When Zhang Wenhong, a prominent infectious disease expert from Shanghai, suggested last summer that China should learn to live with the virus, he was attacked online as a puppet of foreigners. Now, people online have started debating the question of how long the measures will last. Some have even joked that the government should “lie flat,” a reference to a popular term among Chinese millennials for pushing back against societal pressures by doing less.

“People seem to be increasingly fed up with these excessive anti-Covid measures,” said Yanzhong Huang, director of the Center for Global Health Studies at Seton Hall University.

But the outbreak in Hong Kong — where patients on gurneys have been parked outside hospitals and body bags have piled up in wards — has shocked many in the mainland. Charts showing high Covid death rates in Hong Kong, where many older residents are unvaccinated, have been ricocheting around Chinese social media.

The toll on older people in Hong Kong has spurred officials in China to redouble efforts to boost vaccinations among the country’s vulnerable groups. More than 87 percent of China’s population has been fully vaccinated. But among people 80 and older, just over half have had two shots, and less than 20 percent have received a booster, Zeng Yixin, a vice minister of the National Health Commission, said on Friday.

Officials have announced plans to send vaccination trucks to inoculate the many older Chinese who live in less accessible rural areas. Misinformation about the vaccines and a lack of urgency stemming from the relatively low number of cases have exacerbated the problem. 

For months, Li Man, a 69-year-old housewife in Beijing, put off getting vaccinated, believing that she was at low risk for contracting the virus because she did not often go out. Eventually, at the urging of her daughter, she got the jab a few months ago. But in a telephone interview, she said she still felt it had been unnecessary.

“China’s situation is way better than in the United States or other Western countries,” Ms. Li said.

Ms. Li’s confidence points to the high stakes the government faces as it tries to calibrate its response. Beijing has touted China’s low number of deaths from the virus as a sign of the superiority of the country’s top-down, centralized system. A failure to contain the latest surge could erode the party’s legitimacy.

With each new variant, tracing the chain of transmission has become more difficult. Last month, a village near Shenzhen was locked down for nearly three weeks. The community was later cleared and the lockdown was lifted. But within a few days, cases began to emerge, and the village was placed under lockdown again.

In allowing the use of at-home test kits, officials have said that the onus was on residents to report any positive results to their local authorities. Jiao Yahui, an official with China’s National Health Commission, said on Friday that people would be punished if they failed to do so, but she did not specify what the consequences might be.

Even if the authorities succeed in quashing all infections in the current wave, it will only be a matter of time before the next outbreak, said Jin Dongyan, a virologist at the University of Hong Kong. That is why, he said, China urgently needs to come up with a road map to learn how to live with the virus.

“It’s the only option,” Mr. Jin said. “It’s almost impossible now to come back to zero.”

Babies and children younger than age 5 were hospitalized with coronavirus at much higher rates during the latest U.S. surge, when the highly transmissible Omicron variant was dominant, compared with earlier periods in the pandemic, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Hospitalizations of these children were about five times higher during the Omicron surge, between Dec. 19 and Feb. 19, than during the period when the Delta variant was dominant, between June 27 and Dec. 18.

Rates of admission to intensive care also rose dramatically among young children, reaching a peak on Jan. 8 of this year.

Children of color younger than age 5 wound up in hospitals at disproportionate rates. Only one-third of the children were white, while 28 percent were Hispanic and 23 percent were Black. Hispanic people represent just 18 percent of the population, and Black Americans make up 13 percent.

(Six percent of these hospitalizations were among Asian or other Pacific Islander children, about the same as their representation in the population.)

Experts say children of color are infected at higher rates because they are more likely to have parents who work in public-facing jobs, and more likely to live in poverty and in multigenerational households.

Though hospitalization rates for young children are still relatively low, compared to the rates among older Americans, the virus poses special risks to the youngest children and especially to babies.

Infants six months old and younger were the most vulnerable, representing nearly half of the hospitalizations among young children during the Omicron period. They were hospitalized at rates about six times as high at the peak of the Omicron surge, compared with the peak of the Delta wave. Two infants died, the C.D.C. found.

“People should know there are risks to children under 1 that are pretty serious, especially during surges, and they might want to take extra precautions to reduce exposure,” said Julia Raifman, an assistant professor of health law, policy and management at Boston University School of Public Health, who was not involved in the research.

More than 1,000 children younger than age 18 have died of Covid since the pandemic started, including 350 children under 5. But experts also worry about the long-term effects, as well as multisystem inflammatory syndrome, a rare but serious condition.

The C.D.C. study found that most of the children and babies who were hospitalized — about two-thirds — were healthy and did not have underlying medical conditions, as has been the case throughout the pandemic.

No Covid vaccines are currently authorized in the United States for children younger than 5, and the regulatory process has been fraught with delays and setbacks. Public health experts strongly recommend that anyone who comes into regular contact with young children get vaccinated.

“To help protect children too young to be vaccinated, everyone ages five and older, including pregnant women, family members and caregivers, should stay up to date with Covid-19 vaccines,” Dr. Kristin J. Marks, the study’s first author and an epidemic intelligence service officer with the CDC, said in an email.

The study, published on March 15, examined hospitalizations of children in counties in 14 states whose catchment areas represent about 10 percent of the U.S. population.

Mayor Eric Adams has made no secret of his desire to fast-track New York City’s recovery from the coronavirus, and in his regular briefings with health officials, he has been encouraged by the latest metrics: Cases have greatly receded while vaccination rates have hit nearly 90 percent for adults.

But Mr. Adams wanted input from another key sector.

Earlier this month, the mayor entertained a dozen business leaders at his official residence, Gracie Mansion. Over vegan mushroom couscous and wine, Mr. Adams asked what it would take to get people back to offices, according to several participants. The leaders talked about the difficulty of persuading workers to return five days a week — and whether three days was more realistic — and the importance of making the subway safe.

The mayor and his team left the event with a to-do list, including creating a marketing campaign to highlight the city’s comeback.

If the get-together at Gracie Mansion seemed unusual, that’s because it was: Most of the business leaders had never been inside the mayoral residence.

Mr. Adams, a Democrat, has had regular conversations with some of the city’s most influential business leaders, including David Solomon, chief executive at the banking firm Goldman Sachs, and Jonathan Gray, president of the private equity firm Blackstone, to seek their advice — a stark contrast to Mr. Adams’s predecessor, Bill de Blasio, who had a fraught relationship with the business community.

The meetings have underscored not just Mr. Adams’s focus on reopening the city, whose economy has been devastated by the pandemic and is only now slowly rebounding toward health, but also his determination to work with the city’s business leaders in making it happen.

Since taking office in January, Mr. Adams, a former police captain, has had to respond to a series of high-profile crimes, including the shooting deaths of two police officers and violent attacks against Asian Americans. That continued last weekend, with the stabbing of two workers at the Museum of Modern Art, the death of an 87-year-old vocal coach who was shoved to the ground on a Chelsea sidewalk and the disclosure that a gunman targeted homeless men in the streets of Lower Manhattan and Washington, D.C.

But in recent weeks, Mr. Adams — who had made addressing crime a central theme of his mayoral bid — has also begun emphasizing another core campaign message: New York needs to return to normal, and the mayor believes that time is now.

The mayor recently ended the mask mandate in schools and lifted proof-of-vaccination requirements for indoor activities. He has crisscrossed the city to convey the importance for the city to shed its pandemic way of life, making it a point to be seen at high-profile events like ringing the opening bell at the New York Stock Exchange and attending Fashion Week with Anna Wintour. He has even adopted a scolding tone toward those who are reluctant to return to the bustling streets of Manhattan.

“You can’t stay home in your pajamas all day,” Mr. Adams said at an event to announce his economic development team. “That is not who we are as a city. You need to be out cross-pollinating ideas, interacting with humans.”

The city’s financial challenges are harrowing: The unemployment rate has remained high at about 7.5 percent, roughly double the national average; office vacancy rates rose to 20 percent, the highest level in four decades; tourism is not expected to recover until 2025; the city’s budget relies on billions of dollars in federal aid that won’t last forever.

Last week, Mr. Adams released a 59-page “blueprint” for the city’s recovery that focused on reducing gun violence, removing homeless people from the subway and making outdoor dining permanent — reflecting the guidance of business leaders.

“Job No. 1: You have to address the safety issue,” said Charles Phillips, the founder of a private-equity firm who organized the Gracie Mansion event. “The mayor understands that obviously, with his background. You have to make the city appealing from a safety standpoint.”

The business leaders told the mayor that the timing of New York City’s recovery was urgent.

“We just had our best week since Covid began in 2020 — occupancy last week was over 30 percent,” said Scott Rechler, chairman and chief executive of RXR Realty, a major commercial real estate firm and another adviser to the mayor. “That’s not a number I’m thrilled with — it’s usually in the 90s — but every CEO and head of H.R. has a plan in place to bring people back in the next 60 to 90 days.”

Two years into the pandemic, the city’s economy faces numerous challenges. With many employers expected to adopt a hybrid approach where workers would come in three days a week, sales tax revenue is expected to drop by $111 million a year. The occupancy rate for hotels, which had plunged as low as 40 percent in January when the Omicron variant hit, was at 67 percent in mid-March, according to STR, a hospitality analytics company.

Subway ridership is at about 60 percent of its prepandemic levels, and transit leaders have suggested that they can no longer rely heavily on fares to fund the system. On Broadway, just 20 shows are running at 41 houses, though attendance has been around 85 percent, and many more shows are expected to open by the end of April.

Mary Ann Tighe, chief executive of the real estate firm CBRE for the New York region, said she had spoken with Mr. Adams several times since he took office, and has told him that it was important to make people feel comfortable returning.

“It’s about getting the basics right,” she said. “People will come back to a city that they feel safe in and that is clean, and those two conditions allow the city to do much of what it does organically — make great art, make great food, make great business deals.”

In Mr. de Blasio’s final days as mayor, he continued to deliver near daily news briefings on the virus that consumed his last two years in office, claiming 40,000 lives in New York City.

Mr. Adams did not continue the practice. He regularly takes questions from journalists, but his last news conference dedicated to the virus and the city’s health care system — and not focused on relaxing restrictions or on economic recovery — was on Feb. 11 at a health center in Brooklyn, the same day he announced a $100 incentive for people who receive a booster shot.

He has not discussed the growing concerns in recent days over the BA.2 subvariant that is fueling a rise in cases in the United Kingdom. Instead, the mayor seems devoted to delivering a different message.

At a recent event in Times Square, Mr. Adams approached random pedestrians in search of a tourist. Finding one from Canada, he delivered a simple message: “Spend money.”

Three days later, Mr. Adams made the same pitch at the Blue Note jazz club in Greenwich Village: “Some of you are from out of town, and I have one request of you: Spend money.”

Beyond being the city’s cheerleader, Mr. Adams has also embraced the role of city psychologist, encouraging New Yorkers to move past the trauma of the pandemic and to stop “wallowing.” Mr. Adams said that removing masks in schools was an important step.

“The return to normalcy is about substantive things we have to do and symbolic things,” Mr. Adams said in an interview. “As much as we say things are normal, the face mask is a symbol that things are not. It’s time to see our faces again, particularly our children.”

Some elected officials were alarmed by Mr. Adams’s decision to remove masks at schools, pointing to low vaccination rates among some children. They also took issue with lifting the proof-of-vaccination requirement for restaurants, movie theaters and other indoor activities, arguing that the mandate made diners feel safer.

“I am worried that this is going to be interpreted as the pandemic is over, and that people are really just going to let their guard down,” said Mark Levine, the Manhattan borough president, a Democrat.

But even as Mr. Adams has lifted some pandemic rules, he has also kept vaccine mandates for municipal workers and for employees of private companies who are working in person. The mayor’s health advisers insisted that those mandates be preserved and were comfortable relaxing the other rules once transmission fell to levels that the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention considers low, according to a person familiar with the discussions.

Mr. Adams said he kept the employer mandates because people spend more time in workplaces and have a longer risk of exposure over an eight-hour workday.

“The doctors feel strongly that that’s where the most susceptibility is in terms of passing on Covid,” he said in the interview.

Mr. Adams has also acknowledged that workers might not return to offices five days a week. He said he is open to converting office buildings in Midtown Manhattan to housing, and after visiting an office with water views recently, he mused, “I could put my kitchen here; I’d love to live here.”

Some critics, including Joseph Borelli, the Republican minority leader in the City Council who recently dined with Mr. Adams at Angelina’s restaurant in Staten Island, want the mayor to end the private sector mandates.

“They’re a barrier for those who may want to return to work in New York,” Mr. Borelli said, adding that a friend who was unvaccinated and worked in finance was working from an office in New Jersey to avoid complying with the city mandate.

Similar criticism has mounted over the status of another unvaccinated New York employee: Kyrie Irving, the Brooklyn Nets’ star point guard who is barred from playing in New York City. Mr. Irving’s teammate, Kevin Durant, suggested that Mr. Adams was “looking for attention”; LeBron James wrote on Twitter that banning Irving “makes absolutely zero sense,” adding the hashtag #FreeKyrie.

Mr. Adams suggested a simple solution.

“Kyrie can play tomorrow,” the mayor said at a recent news conference. “Get vaccinated.”

For the past two years, as the coronavirus has wreaked havoc on American lives and the world at large, Dr. Ashish K. Jha has been there to make sense of it all. He has been hard to miss.

You could find him on MSNBC, before vaccines arrived, bluntly acknowledging that “it’s hard to overemphasize how bad things are.” Or on CNN, upbraiding maskless lawmakers for spreading Covid-19, or Fox News, proclaiming remote schooling “a disaster.” The Museum of Science in Boston went so far as to create a hologram of Dr. Jha last year, using artificial intelligence and sound clips, to answer coronavirus questions.

Now Dr. Jha, the dean of Brown University’s School of Public Health, a respected academic and a practicing internist with minimal government experience, is about to join the White House as President Biden’s new coronavirus response coordinator. A preternaturally calm 51-year-old whom the health news site Stat once described as “network TV’s Everyman expert on Covid,” he is going to take charge of the most complicated federal response to a crisis in modern history.

While his communication skills will help, there is much more to the job than talking to the public. It requires coordinating across government agencies and the private sector, from the Food and Drug Administration, which considers which drugs and vaccines to approve, and the State Department, which works to get vaccines overseas, to drugmakers and pharmacies.

“Probably his biggest challenge is that he doesn’t know government, he doesn’t have experience, and it does take a while to know who you should call, who you can’t and how you get through the hierarchy,” said Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, Mr. Biden’s top medical adviser for the pandemic, who will work closely with Dr. Jha. “But he’s a smart guy. He’ll figure it out.”

Dr. Jha’s selection signals two things about Mr. Biden’s thinking. First, the president wants to keep the federal pandemic response centered in the White House, instead of delegating it to the Department of Health and Human Services or one of its agencies, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Second, he wants to put it in the hands of a public health expert. Dr. Jha is replacing Jeffrey D. Zients, an entrepreneur and management consultant who presided over a huge mobilization of coronavirus vaccines, tests and therapeutics over the past 14 months.

With the supply and logistics infrastructure now in place, Dr. Jha will face different challenges. Virus cases are rising in parts of Europe and Asia, and most experts, including Dr. Fauci, believe the numbers will rise again here. Yet many Americans do not want to think about the pandemic anymore. Mask mandates have lifted all over the country — even the federal Department of Health and Human Services is making masks optional — and many Americans will most likely resist putting them back on, even if conditions warrant it.

“How this plays out depends on how the dynamics of Covid play out, and frankly how much time elapses before he has to tell the American people we’re in trouble as well,” Dr. Nicole Lurie, who served as assistant health secretary for preparedness and response during the Obama administration, said of Dr. Jha. “And that could plausibly happen before he steps into this role, or on Day 1.”

Dr. Jha may also get caught up in a bitter funding battle between the White House and Congress, where the administration’s request for $22.5 billion in emergency coronavirus relief aid is stalled. If no agreement is reached by the time he takes office in April, the government will be out of money to buy more therapeutics and vaccines.

A growing number of U.S. states have stopped giving daily updates of the number of new coronavirus cases, hospitalizations and deaths, which, combined with the rise of at-home testing whose results are often not officially registered, is creating a more uneven real-time look at the state of the pandemic.

While most states still report each weekday, more than a dozen have cut back to once or twice a week, according to a New York Times database. Arizona, Hawaii, Kentucky, Nevada, Ohio, Oklahoma and South Carolina have moved to weekly reports, as has the District of Columbia. Wyoming has moved to twice-a-week reports. More reductions are expected to come, public health officials have said.

Nationally, the declines in new cases, hospitalizations and deaths are tapering off, and some experts are concerned that the drop in reporting could create blind spots if the pandemic begins a resurgence.

Many states have recently dropped pandemic restrictions, even as cases surge again in Europe, which has often served as a bellwether for the pandemic’s U.S. trajectory. Though testing has fallen in some countries, detected cases are up globally about 20 percent over the last two weeks, according to the Center for Systems Science and Engineering at Johns Hopkins University.

A few states also scaled back their data reporting frequency last summer, just as a wave of new cases from the Delta variant hit. But there are key differences this time, health officials said.

“We’ve moved to a place where we don’t need to know the absolute numbers,” said Dr. Marcus Plescia, chief medical officer for the Association of State and Territorial Health Officials, which represents the public health agencies of all 50 states, Washington D.C., and U.S. territories. “We can still monitor trends for people who are getting tests in public settings. We still have a good sense of where the absolute numbers are going.”

He said that the reduction in reporting would not necessarily mean that states would be less prepared for new waves. Past spikes have come from variants that were discovered and sequenced internationally, including Delta and Omicron. “It was a matter of waiting until they got here,” Dr. Plescia pointed out.

The benefits of the daily data reporting has also shifted, according to Dr. Gigi Gronvall, a testing expert and a senior scholar at the Center for Health Security at Johns Hopkins University.

“We did see this in June, the attempt to report it more like flu, and it was warranted then,” she said. “In June, cases had dropped, and we did not yet have Delta. We didn’t have much demand for, and didn’t have, rapid antigen tests. Now the government has literally given everyone tests. People who are getting tested who are testing positive are almost certainly not telling their health departments. So the data is pretty wonky.”

She said that other indicators are more valuable at this point, like hospitalization and vaccination numbers and wastewater surveillance.

Dr. Plescia agreed, saying it was the right time to bring Covid reporting more in line with how public health agencies track other infectious diseases. He said that the result would be a more complete picture of the coronavirus’s trajectory because there would be more time to iron out the fluctuations of daily data. In fact, the daily data “does not necessarily influence the interventions that we’re considering,” he said.

However, some researchers warned that the drawdown of state reporting on pandemic metrics presented a threat to response times.

“Infectious diseases like SARS-CoV-2 move very quickly, and therefore we need to respond quickly to early signals of rising cases or a new variant,” said Dr. Sam Scarpino, managing director of pathogen surveillance at the Rockefeller Foundation’s Pandemic Prevention Institute. “Early action prevents school closures, mask mandates and saves lives. However, if we’re waiting around for days or weeks, or months for new data, it’s hard to see the signals quickly enough.”

As coronavirus case counts continue to plummet across the United States, people’s immunity may be declining, too. Several studies have found that while mRNA booster shots have been successful at preventing hospitalization and death, their effectiveness against infections is waning. But scientists and physicians are sharply divided over which groups may need another booster, and caution that the available data is still preliminary and has not yet shown how long the benefits of a fourth dose will last.

On Thursday, Moderna sought emergency use authorization from the Food and Drug Administration for a second booster shot for all adults. The company’s request came just days after Pfizer and BioNTech filed for emergency authorization for a second booster of their coronavirus vaccine for people 65 and older.

Moderna said that its much broader request would give the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, as well as health care providers, more flexibility in determining who would benefit most from getting an additional booster shot and when.

As of now, the only people authorized for a fourth dose are many of those with weakened immune systems. This includes teenagers and adults who have had organ or stem cell transplants, are undergoing chemotherapy for cancer, have advanced or untreated H.I.V. or are on immune-suppressing drugs.

It’s hard to predict how soon — or if — the F.D.A. might authorize a second booster for all adults. The agency is expected to convene an advisory committee next month to discuss the issue. And while experts say it’s reasonable that the committee might move swiftly on Pfizer’s application for older adults, it is unclear if Moderna’s more sweeping request will get the green light.

“I don’t think everybody should get another booster right now,” said Dr. Yvonne Maldonado, a pediatric infectious diseases physician at Stanford University. “But I don’t see any reason why we shouldn’t start to review the data that is available.”

If someone had told you on March 1, 2020, what the next two years held for New York City, you would not have believed it.

The governor of New York said that day that there would be “community spread” of the new disease but that there was “no reason for concern.” The mayor said that the virus “could be anywhere” but told people to go about their normal lives. It sounded reasonable.

The rate at which disaster ensued was in every sense of the word breathtaking. A mighty city silenced. Thousands dying alone. Bodies stacked in freezer trucks. Half a million people out of work.

Two years and 40,000 deaths later, there remain rips and rifts in the social fabric that have not been repaired and may not be for a while. Something has been lost, some kind of trust perhaps. Time has been lost, definitely. And yet the dire predictions of a city damaged beyond repair proved wrong.

As Plague Year 3 dawns, New Yorkers know that there is no going back to “before.” Too much has happened. That shore is too distant.