Carrie Lam, the chief executive, announced that flight bans would be lifted and quarantine times cut, as experts said the worst of the latest wave might have passed.

Hong Kong announced on Monday that it would lift its ban on flights from nine countries on April 1, just one of the restrictions it plans to relax as experts and government officials say the worst of an Omicron-driven wave might have passed.

Hong Kong’s leader, Carrie Lam, said on Monday that vaccinated residents would only have to quarantine for seven days, down from 14, upon arrival from overseas. The isolation for travelers had been one of the strictest in the world and had discouraged many from returning to the Chinese territory of 7.4 million people.

She also suspended plans to have every person in the city undergo P.C.R. testing and moved up a deadline to receive booster shots to May 31. The extra dose will be necessary to enter public places, including supermarkets and shopping malls.

For most of the pandemic, Hong Kong has sealed itself off from the rest of the world and required travelers to quarantine for as long as three weeks in a hotel, mirroring policies in mainland China.

Then, as the Omicron variant spread rapidly across the world early this year, the government banned flights from the United States, Australia, Britain, Canada, France, India, Nepal, Pakistan and the Philippines in an attempt to keep virus numbers close to zero. When flights resume from those nine countries in April, only vaccinated residents will be eligible to return.

Even though the new measures remain some of the strictest in the world, Hong Kong’s approach appears to be diverging slightly from that of mainland China. Two of China’s largest cities, Shanghai and Shenzhen, remain in lockdown, and millions of residents there are required to undergo P.C.R. testing in an effort to bring case numbers back to zero.

More than 5,000 people have died from Covid in Hong Kong, and more than one million cases have been recorded since January. Researchers estimate that nearly half of the city may have been infected by the virus.

The lifting of flight bans comes at the behest of experts, including Gabriel Leung, dean of the University of Hong Kong, who said last month that residents are more at risk of infection from community transmissions than from imported cases.

The Hong Kong government has lurched from one policy to another in tackling the fast-moving Omicron outbreak. Mrs. Lam, the city’s leader, said Monday that she would suspend plans for mandatory coronavirus testing, weeks after rumors of a concurrent lockdown triggered waves of panic buying and an exodus from the city.

Schools were closed for an early “summer holiday” in February, in part because officials planned to use campuses for mass testing sites. Mrs. Lam said there was no longer a “road map” to conduct mass testing with the outbreak still raging, but she would not rule out that option in the future.

The Food and Drug Administration is ratcheting up a wide range of facility inspections that were delayed by travel pauses after the pandemic began.

The inspections have long been a crucial tool to ensure that drugs are contaminant-free, device flaws are fixed and the food supply is sanitary. If agency inspectors find serious problems, they usually require improvements — but they also can seize goods, or pursue civil or criminal penalties.

Typically in recent years, the F.D.A. inspected about 12,500 U.S. facilities annually, a number that fell by about half, to about 6,100, in 2021. Foreign inspections — the agency visits facilities making products for the American market — fell even more precipitously, from more than 3,100 in the years before the pandemic to 167 in 2021.

In recent months, F.D.A. inspections have turned up alarming problems. A consumer complaint led federal inspectors to a Family Dollar distribution facility in Arkansas in January, where they found live and dead rodents “in various states of decay.”

A review of company documents revealed that 2,300 rodents had been collected since March 2021. A recall of a wide array of food, medications, cosmetics and dietary supplements followed.

F.D.A. inspectors have also been probing Abbott Nutrition’s baby formula manufacturing facility in Sturgis, Mich., after the company reported finding Cronobactor sakazakii bacteria during its own routine testing.

The company has also issued a recall. The investigation includes five infant hospitalizations and may have contributed to two deaths.

An estimated 73 percent of the facilities making active drug ingredients for the U.S. market are overseas. The federal Government Accountability Office has raised concerns about the inspection lapse and staff vacancies among foreign inspectors.

The F.D.A. said on Friday that “mission critical” inspections never ceased, even as the agency halted travel to ensure the safety of its work force during virus surges in the pandemic. Domestic inspections resumed again in February after a pause during soaring cases of the Omicron variant. The F.D.A. plans to return to its “normal cadence” of overseas inspections in April.

The F.D.A. “is working as quickly and as safely as possible to resume normal operating status for inspections that prioritize public health,” a spokesman, Jeremy Kahn, said in an email.

In the United States and abroad, the dip in inspections came with a drop in enforcement actions, such as warning letters, injunctions and product recalls, according to an analysis by the law firm Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom.

Enforcement shifted focus as well, a partner, Jennifer Bragg noted, zeroing in more on unsubstantiated claims about the testing and treatment of the coronavirus.

One unintended consequence of a new wave of inspections could be that companies halt production while responding to problems that F.D.A. officials find, exacerbating current medication or sterile injection fluid shortages.

That happened years ago, when the agency focused on overseas blood-thinner makers after sterility lapses were tied to dozens of deaths in the United States, said Erin Fox, a drug shortage expert at the University of Utah.

“Are we going to have a repeat of that?” Ms. Fox wondered. “Just quality in general is really important.”

Babies and children younger than age 5 were hospitalized with coronavirus at much higher rates during the latest U.S. surge, when the highly transmissible Omicron variant was dominant, compared with earlier periods in the pandemic, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Hospitalizations of these children were about five times higher during the Omicron surge, between Dec. 19 and Feb. 19, than during the period when the Delta variant was dominant, between June 27 and Dec. 18.

Rates of admission to intensive care also rose dramatically among young children, reaching a peak on Jan. 8 of this year.

Children of color younger than age 5 wound up in hospitals at disproportionate rates. Only one-third of the children were white, while 28 percent were Hispanic and 23 percent were Black. Hispanic people represent just 18 percent of the population, and Black Americans make up 13 percent.

(Six percent of these hospitalizations were among Asian or other Pacific Islander children, about the same as their representation in the population.)

Experts say children of color are infected at higher rates because they are more likely to have parents who work in public-facing jobs, and more likely to live in poverty and in multigenerational households.

Though hospitalization rates for young children are still relatively low, compared to the rates among older Americans, the virus poses special risks to the youngest children and especially to babies.

Infants six months old and younger were the most vulnerable, representing nearly half of the hospitalizations among young children during the Omicron period. They were hospitalized at rates about six times as high at the peak of the Omicron surge, compared with the peak of the Delta wave. Two infants died, the C.D.C. found.

“People should know there are risks to children under 1 that are pretty serious, especially during surges, and they might want to take extra precautions to reduce exposure,” said Julia Raifman, an assistant professor of health law, policy and management at Boston University School of Public Health, who was not involved in the research.

More than 1,000 children younger than age 18 have died of Covid since the pandemic started, including 350 children under 5. But experts also worry about the long-term effects, as well as multisystem inflammatory syndrome, a rare but serious condition.

The C.D.C. study found that most of the children and babies who were hospitalized — about two-thirds — were healthy and did not have underlying medical conditions, as has been the case throughout the pandemic.

No Covid vaccines are currently authorized in the United States for children younger than 5, and the regulatory process has been fraught with delays and setbacks. Public health experts strongly recommend that anyone who comes into regular contact with young children get vaccinated.

“To help protect children too young to be vaccinated, everyone ages five and older, including pregnant women, family members and caregivers, should stay up to date with Covid-19 vaccines,” Dr. Kristin J. Marks, the study’s first author and an epidemic intelligence service officer with the CDC, said in an email.

The study, published on March 15, examined hospitalizations of children in counties in 14 states whose catchment areas represent about 10 percent of the U.S. population.

Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the Biden administration’s top adviser on the pandemic, predicted on Sunday an “uptick” in coronavirus infections similar to the current increase in Europe, despite the current decline in cases, hospitalizations and deaths in the United States.

It is “no time at all to declare victory, because this virus has fooled us before and we really must be prepared for the possibility that we might get another variant,” Dr. Fauci said on ABC’s “This Week.” “And we don’t want to be caught flat-footed on that.”

While anticipating a new rise, Dr. Fauci said that at this time he does not expect a surge. Still, the BA.2 subvariant has been shown to be a more contagious version of the Omicron variant, though it, too, causes less-severe illness in most people.

Epidemiologists have said the current lull in U.S. cases mirrors the dip that Europe enjoyed before many officials in the region relaxed restrictions like indoor masking.

Even as U.S. case numbers continue to fall to levels reminiscent of last summer, BA.2 variant infections are making up a greater share of them. That proportion ranges from about 20 percent in the Midwest to 39 percent in New York and New Jersey, according to data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

With cases remaining low, Dr. Fauci said he doesn’t currently see the nation ramping up restrictions, “but you always have to have the flexibility.” He also cautioned that restrictions could come back into play if hospitalizations begin to rise.

About 65 percent of Americans are vaccinated, Dr. Fauci noted, and about half of the people eligible for a booster have gotten the shot. He said it remains critical for Congress to continue funding the tests, treatments and booster shots that may soon be in greater need.

Federal officials have already said that a stalled aid package for coronavirus countermeasures means that monoclonal antibody shipments to states will slow by about 30 percent this week and that orders for more antiviral pills are on hold.

Dr. Vivek Murthy, the U.S. surgeon general, echoed Dr. Fauci’s call for congressional funding for those anti-viral treatments and antibody infusions so they are available if needed in greater quantities.

He declined to predict an immediate surge in an interview on “Fox News Sunday,” saying the cases in Europe tend to presage those in the United States, and that Americans can expect to see rises and falls. He urged the nation to focus on “preparation, not panic.”

“We’re in that mile 18 of a marathon,” Dr. Murthy said. “We can’t quit, because Covid’s not quitting.”

Disney will temporarily close its resort in Shanghai from Monday in response to China’s rising numbers of Covid cases, the company announced.

The move reflected the growing restrictions on travel and entertainment across China as the government tries to stamp out the emerged of the Omicron variant of the coronavirus under its strict “zero Covid” policy. The country is facing its worst Covid-19 surge since the coronavirus first emerged in the city of Wuhan. On Saturday, it reported its first deaths from the virus in more than a year.

The Shanghai Disney Resort, which includes Shanghai Disneyland, Disneytown and Wishing Star Park, said any decision on a reopening date would be made after consulting with the local authorities. Shanghai Disneyland closed as the virus spread throughout China in early 2020 and reopened in May that year.

China recorded 2,027 confirmed coronavirus cases on Sunday, with 1,947 local transmissions, including more than 1,000 in the hard-hit northeast province of Jilin, where the two Covid deaths were reported on Saturday. Jilin banned its 24 million residents from leaving the province or traveling between cities because of the surging case numbers there.

Major commercial cities, including Shanghai and Shenzhen, have also closed schools and offices in some areas, and transport problems have strained supply chains. Last week, China’s leader, Xi Jinping, urged officials to try to limit the economic fallout even as they rushed to stifle outbreaks.

While cities in Jilin continue to enforce stringent controls in many areas, Shenzhen, which is next to Hong Kong, announced that from Monday it would start adjusting restrictions to allow as many as employees and businesses to get back to work. Couriers, taxi drivers and building laborers in many areas could use a daily testing system to return to work, the city’s government said.

In other global news:

Germany dropped nearly all Covid rules on social distancing, indoor mask wearing and test and vaccine requirements on Sunday. But as a rise in cases has continued to break records in recent days, most states have delayed scrapping restrictions until the beginning of April.

South Korea said that, starting on Monday, most international travelers who had received a booster shot or had been fully vaccinated within the past six months can enter without having to quarantine. Previously, all inbound passengers were subject to a seven-day isolation period. Arrivals from Ukraine, Pakistan, Uzbekistan and Myanmar will still be required to quarantine.

Two Sunday matches in the Oceania qualifiers for the FIFA World Cup in Qatar — between the Cook Islands and Tahiti, and Vanuatu and the Solomon Islands — were canceled after several athletes tested positive for the coronavirus, the Oceania Football Confederation said. The “vast majority” of Vanuatu’s team tested positive, and it has since withdrawn from the tournament.

Austria will reintroduce an indoor mask mandate, the health minister, Johannes Rauch, announced on Friday, bucking a trend among European countries to lift coronavirus precautions despite rising cases.

“It was simply necessary to take countermeasures now,” Mr. Rauch said at a news conference on Friday, just weeks after Austria lifted its mask mandates in most indoor spaces.

Earlier this month, Austrian officials had announced that the nation’s general vaccine mandate would be temporarily suspended. It recently took official effect, but enforcement had not begun. About 74 percent of Austrians are fully vaccinated, according to the Our World in Data.

But Mr. Rauch said that experts have now corrected forecasts for the trajectory of the virus and that officials were concerned about staffing and the availability of beds in hospitals and retirement and nursing homes.

Starting on Wednesday, FFP2 masks (Europe’s equivalent to American N95s) will be required in indoor spaces again, and the government would soon revise the isolation rules for infected people, the Ministry of Social Affairs, Health, Care and Consumer Protection said in a statement on Friday.

A highly transmissible Omicron subvariant, BA.2, is contributing to the new surge around Europe this month. Although deaths have continued to fall in the region, the number of Covid patients in hospitals has risen in some European countries such as the United Kingdom, Ireland, and Austria, according to Our World in Data.

Over the past two weeks, new cases in Austria have increased by 54 percent, according to the Center for Systems Science and Engineering at Johns Hopkins University.

But European countries have nonetheless been pushing to reopen. Last month, Denmark dropped all its restrictions, including a mask mandate in indoor spaces and on public transportation. The British government has ended all remaining legal coronavirus curbs in England, including the legal requirement for infected people to isolate. On Thursday, Italy announced it would progressively lift its vaccination and health pass requirements.

But as countries greeted the end of many precautions, Austria’s announcement was a concerning signal that momentum in that direction may have been premature. Mr. Rauch said that earlier policy changes were based on predictions that cases would be dropping by now.

“That has not come true. It has changed, and changed significantly,” he said.

If someone had told you on March 1, 2020, what the next two years held for New York City, you would not have believed it.

The governor of New York said that day that there would be “community spread” of the new disease but that there was “no reason for concern.” The mayor said that the virus “could be anywhere” but told people to go about their normal lives. It sounded reasonable.

The rate at which disaster ensued was in every sense of the word breathtaking. A mighty city silenced. Thousands dying alone. Bodies stacked in freezer trucks. Half a million people out of work.

Two years and 40,000 deaths later, there remain rips and rifts in the social fabric that have not been repaired and may not be for a while. Something has been lost, some kind of trust perhaps. Time has been lost, definitely. And yet the dire predictions of a city damaged beyond repair proved wrong.

As Plague Year 3 dawns, New Yorkers know that there is no going back to “before.” Too much has happened. That shore is too distant.