Jou-Yie Chou is among a new breed of late-stage pandemic hotel regulars: the super commuter.

As the pandemic drags into its third calendar year and remote work shifts to hybrid models, employees who moved to the suburbs or even farther are becoming fixtures at city hotels, where they are establishing comfortable bolt-holes after the commute in for meetings that can’t be taken over Zoom. And some hotels, eager to tap into this new market while still having yet to recover from the blow of 2020, are crafting new packages designed specifically for them, with amenities like parking, conference rooms and low midweek rates to sweeten the deal.

Take Mr. Chou, who moved to Lakeville, Conn., from New York City with his wife, Bentley Beich, early in the pandemic. To take the sting out of the more than 100-mile drive to his job as a partner at the design agency Post Company, Mr. Chou, 40, has become a regular on Tuesday nights at Brooklyn’s Ace Hotel (he is a former brand director for the hotel). He doesn’t entirely mind.

“Being back in the city, there’s still a liveliness to it that is pretty energizing. Being in and around that culture is a welcome change,” he said.

For hoteliers, regular stays by commuters like Mr. Chou offer one path back to recouping the massive losses they experienced during the pandemic. After dipping in the early weeks of 2022 as the Omicron surge ripped through the country, occupancy rates in the United States climbed past 50 percent in February, according to STR, a global hospitality data and analytics company (for comparison, 2019 occupancy rates were 66.1 percent). The growth was apparent across not just weekend stays, but also those logged from Monday to Wednesday.

For many of the new suburbanites, this weekly ritual offers a pleasant link to their prepandemic selves.

“Those two days are pretty intense. But it’s also amazing what you can accomplish in two days in the city,” Mr. Chou said. His time in Brooklyn, he said, is both draining and energizing. “It makes me feel like I’m part of this creative community that we left when we moved away.”

While the Ace Hotel chain has Mr. Chou’s loyalty, it hasn’t rolled out any promotions for midweek commuters. But other brands have. In Britain, The Accor Group, whose hotels include The Savoy, Mama Shelter and the Pullman London St. Pancras, crafted a Commute and Stay promotion, which includes two midweek nights in a discounted room (up to 15 percent off) in a city-center hotel with flexible cancellation and assistance in booking venues for after-work drinks or entertaining clients.

The citizenM hotel chain, which has properties in cities like New York, Boston, San Francisco and London, recently started a monthly subscription deal for regulars, offering one stay per month at 99 euros, or about $108. “We’re definitely seeing a new rhythm of one to two stays a month,” said Ernest Lee, the brand’s chief growth officer. “We saw it a little bit before the pandemic, but not to this level.”

The Hoxton Chicago has a Work Stay Play package, which the general manager, Amos Kelsey, created to allow guests access to the facility’s in-house co-working space after noticing an uptick in far-flung commuters booking midweek stays.

“That package has really been popular with suburbanites coming in from all corners of Chicago,” said Mr. Kelsey, who noted that midweek business at the Hoxton has outpaced other hotels in the city — at the end of 2021, corporate bookings were three times higher than the wider Chicago market.

At reStays Ottawa, a boutique hotel that opened in the Canadian capital in 2021, the marketing director, Claudine Hart, reports a pattern of single or two-day stays, with business travelers comprising 80 percent of midweek guests.

At the San Francisco Proper Hotel, which is on Market Street, within walking distance of companies like Twitter and Uber, Mario Bevilacqua von Günderrode, the general manager, said midweek occupancy rates are climbing at the same pace as weekend rates. “We actually started to change the way we do business and the way we cater to our clients following this trend,” he said. The hotel has made sure their room service menu is available 24/7 and all of their food and beverage outlets are open; last month they also added a complimentary car service for trips to nearby offices.

John Gilligan, the general manager of Canopy by Hilton Washington D.C. Bethesda North, used to rely on government workers to fill his midweek rooms. That traffic has yet to return, but there’s a new kind of regular: commuting employees of Total Wine & More, the liquor superstore whose headquarters are within a 10-minute drive. “We’ve seen them coming back quite frequently,” he said.

Some former city dwellers now facing hourslong commutes have considered renting pied-à-terres in their former urban homes. But skyrocketing rent prices — nationally, the cost to lease an apartment is up more than 10 percent, and in cities like Boston and Orlando, they’ve jumped more than 25 percent — have made regular hotel stays a more affordable option.

Bob Schmidt, 61, is the co-founder of a New York City-based financial-technology company, The Guarantors. A lifelong New Yorker, he moved to Cape Cod with his wife in January 2021 when work was fully remote, but shortly after began commuting into the office for a few days at a time, once every three weeks. He’s thought about buying a small apartment to use when he visits, but he crunched the numbers and realized it would cost much more than his hotel bills. And it would also force him to commute to the same neighborhood.

“If you’re only staying four or five nights a month in New York City, it doesn’t pay to have an apartment right now,” he said. By staying in hotels, he said, “I can move around as much as I want. I generally find a boutique hotel, go there for two or three months, and when I’ve had my fill, I pick another neighborhood and another hotel.”

Hotels in Manhattan are offering car commuters like Mr. Schmidt targeted deals. In Midtown Manhattan, the Crowne Plaza HY36 developed a parking package after staff noticed a significant uptick of midweek guests driving in from the tristate area. Parking in the hotel is generally $67 per night; the package, which is now the hotel’s most booked promotion, offers rates as low as $20.

And nearby, both the Conrad New York Downtown and the Conrad New York Midtown have crafted commuter-focused packages for workers who don’t have access to a conference room. At the Conrad New York Downtown, a package called “Work and Well” includes day use of a suite and room service delivery of breakfast, lunch and a 4 p.m. cocktail; at the Conrad New York Midtown, “Clock In at Conrad” allows up to eight colleagues to co-work in a sky suite with catered breakfast and lunch, and added perks, including fitness-center access and sessions with a wellness coach. Some hotels are even offering employees who have grown accustomed to midday naps on the living room sofa a spot for a quick snooze. At Walker Hotels, which has two locations in New York City, nap pod memberships are available for weekday power naps; four sessions, each good for 90 minutes, cost $199.

“This reverse diaspora had to start sometime,” said James Bailey, a leadership professor at George Washington University. “People can come back to the office for those two days and stay at a hotel. Because you’ve got all those folks who moved deep into the suburbs, or even beyond to the exurbs. So this is how it’s going to have to happen to get them back to work.”

Follow New York Times Travel on Instagram, Twitter and Facebook. And sign up for our weekly Travel Dispatch newsletter to receive expert tips on traveling smarter and inspiration for your next vacation. Dreaming up a future getaway or just armchair traveling? Check out our 52 Places for a Changed World for 2022.