RHYME’S ROOMSThe Architecture of PoetryBy Brad Leihauser

If you write about poetry, you will at some point consider putting together a book introducing the art to general readers. “Poetry is so wonderful and yet so unpopular,” you will say to yourself. “If only more people understood how worthwhile it really is.” So you will collect your thoughts, make a couple of outlines, and then do your best to nudge our country’s most recalcitrant cultural practice just slightly closer to the audiences whose attention might — what? Help it? Help them? Surely both, you will think, even if only a little.

But you will face a couple of problems. The first is that what many readers want from poetry — fireworks, wisdom — is not necessarily what poetry will give them. The second is that for the typical reader, even some of poetry’s most basic tools are unfamiliar, if not entirely alien.

This is the dilemma that haunts Brad Leithauser’s admirable, flawed new book, “Rhyme’s Rooms: The Architecture of Poetry.” Leithauser is a veteran of the poetry world; a capable poet who excels at traditional forms; a shrewd editor (his selected volume of Randall Jarrell’s criticism is a lightning storm in a Mason jar); a professor, naturally; and a critic over the years for places like The New Yorker and The New York Review of Books. In the interest of completeness, I should also note that Leithauser once figured in a dispute between a group of poets who favored rhyme and meter and other groups who thought rhyme and meter were bad and these two groups had many arguments in many journals and as I type this I find my attention wandering, is that a fire truck parked on my street? Anyway, he’s fully qualified to tell you about iambic pentameter.

“Rhyme’s Rooms” is loosely arranged as a guide to poetry’s structures and devices — stanzas, slant rhyme and so forth — along the lines of such warhorses as John Hollander’s “Rhyme’s Reason: A Guide to English Verse.” But Leithauser’s approach is essayistic rather than procedural; this book is not a how-to so much as a how-about. So after a cruise through some basic English verse devices to start the book, we get a swerve into Tin Pan Alley songwriting, then a chapter on Gerard Manley Hopkins, a disquisition on the nature of wordplay and so on. Individual sections likewise hop quickly from stone to stone, sometimes haphazardly. In a chapter on meter, for instance, Leithauser starts by discussing the concept of relative stress (that is, the idea that a stressed syllable isn’t really stressed in an absolute sense, just more or less stressed than its neighbors), then moves to the difference between meter and rhythm, then to what he perceives as a distressing lack of good books on poetic form, then to the annoying way in which scholars allegedly “obsess narrowly over what the poem says,” until finally, after 10 pages, we wind up here: “The message of most poetry, including the greatest poetry, is usually commonplace or even banal.”

Along the way, we get readings of individual poems and poetic effects that are enjoyable, if sometimes idiosyncratic. Is it really true that “we can say with certainty” that “the pentameter derives much of its power and charm through a numerical imbalance” (that is, the line has five stresses, rather than four or six)? Or is this like saying that a fluffy bunny derives much of its adorableness from being rabbit-shaped? It doesn’t matter, because the idea leads Leithauser to compare writing in pentameter to “controlled falling,” which is an amusing and useful way to imagine this major structure.

Leithauser has a trove of formal poetry at his command, and his examples (ranging from nearly lost figures like Chidiock Tichborne, who died in 1586, to contemporaries like Paul Muldoon) show a stamp collector’s appreciation for minute difference. In particular, Leithauser is a superb reader of Louis MacNeice, the mid-20th-century Irish writer who is still undervalued by American poets. MacNeice, he writes, partakes “of the spirit not so much of the chess player, who naturally focuses on plausible lines of play, as the chess problemist, who relishes positions that wouldn’t ordinarily arise.” The prose throughout “Rhyme’s Rooms” is snappily business casual in this manner, with fairly involved discussions of iambic tetrameter stitched through with little pops of color like, “Most books should probably limit themselves to a single anecdote at the expense of dimwitted American tourists.” The effect can be winning but also odd; as if an accountant kept cracking jokes to you while trying to explain accelerated depreciation.

The oddity is inevitable, because the book’s project is itself odd. What we have here isn’t a professor talking about versification for an audience of students, but a poet talking in detail about technical aspects of poems for an audience of — well, who exactly? Leithauser says that he is writing for “the reader who loves words and literature but maybe feels some trepidation, and a little nervous resentment, as well as various unvoiced cravings, on confronting a poem on a page.” This describes a fairly large chunk of humanity, so how might we describe that ideal reader more specifically? What is this reader actually like?

“Rhyme’s Rooms” seems unsure. This reader presumably doesn’t know who Joseph Brodsky was, since he is identified as “the Russian poet and Nobel laureate.” Yet this reader is apparently going to be undeterred by the 340-page length of this book or its fascination with poetry’s structural arsenal (“It’s rare for a seven-syllable line to feel trochaic right through to its end”). This reader has enough literary savvy to be amused by potshots at hackneyed poetic conventions (“Aggressive enjambments are the bane of contemporary poetry”). But this reader needs a framing device to understand poetry that involves imagining a remote tribe of perfect readers whimsically called “Funesians” (from a Borges story about a boy named Funes, who perceives and remembers everything — and the reader is going to appreciate this as well, it would seem). This reader knows very little about the contemporary American poetry world, but this reader also needs to be told almost nothing about it (vast, prize-strewn swaths of that domain are resolutely ignored here). This reader is a cloud blown together and apart by opposing winds.

That’s no criticism of Leithauser; it’s simply a function of the genre to which his book belongs. That genre — Learn Poetry! — attempts not just to imagine a reader, but to imagine a world in which that imaginary reader could exist. It’s a task no single book can accomplish. So these works are either frustrating, partial successes like this one, or dull, purple failures in which a prickly, piercing art is reduced to corny sayings and walks in the woods. But this doesn’t make the genre worthless. At the end of “Rhyme’s Rooms,” Leithauser writes, “I suppose what I’m doing here, in my concluding chapter, might be termed a defense of poetry.” As he points out, such defenses have a long legacy — a legacy that is, as most poets know, both moving and dubious. Here is the book’s final line: “Poetry improves people.” Does it? Leithauser believes it does, and it’s clear he also believes poetry has improved him. Perhaps, where poetry is concerned, believing is enough.