Until 4 p.m., brunch is the main bill of fare at this new restaurant in the former Du’s Donuts space, in the arcade of the William Vale hotel in Williamsburg, Brooklyn. Barry Dry and Tom Rowse, the owners of Parched Hospitality Group, which is behind the Hole in the Wall restaurants, have hired Matt Foley, a former sous-chef at Marea, to be executive chef. He’ll run brunch, as well as dinner, with an eclectic menu that includes a burger, fish and chips, rigatoni alla vodka with spicy shrimp, Thai green curry and half a chicken with roasted spring vegetables. Sticky date pudding and lemon panna cotta are the sweets. The restaurant is a spinoff of Isla in the Hotel Hendricks in Manhattan, which reopens Thursday after a long pandemic hiatus. In addition, locations of Isla & Co. will show up this year in Atlanta, Miami Beach and West Palm Beach. (Opens Wednesday)

At this new branch of a SoHo bistro, the owners Raphael Louzon, who is also the chef, and Jeremie Mouyal, are serving their style of Vietnamese food, some of it breakfast-focused, like the menu at their original Lafayette Street spot. You can find bao Benedict (eggs Benedict on a bao bun) and Luc Lac (beef in a hot pot with eggs and rice). Other dishes suit cravings any time, like taro fries with spicy mayo, tuna ceviche with crispy rice, and Mama Tom shrimp in curried coconut milk.

Jugkrwut Borin and Arada Moonroj offer charcoal-grilled skewers, said to be an especially popular snack sold outside schools in Thailand, at this makeover of their restaurant, Lamoon. Chicken, pork and squid are the main attractions.

Helen Nguyen, who has been doing pop-ups, community dinners and takeout under this title for several years, has finally opened a restaurant in the Lower East Side. Her partner is Jennifer Saesue, an owner of Fish Cheeks in NoHo. The menu reflects Ms. Nguyen’s French training with chefs like Daniel Boulud, while remaining true to her Vietnamese roots. A menu highlight, bo khong luc lac, the popular shaken beef, is made with a dry-aged tomahawk steak done like steak au poivre but with Vietnamese ingredients in the sauce, with fries on the side. Ngheu and chem chap hap sa, steamed clams and mussels, come in a buttery lemongrass broth.

Jaz Rupall is bringing her interpretation of Northern Indian fare to Hell’s Kitchen. Ms. Rupall, who was born and raised in Hertfordshire, England, to Indian parents, moved to New York 15 years ago. She worked in finance, but when the pandemic began, she started cooking for friends and ran cooking classes out of her Upper West Side apartment. During that time, the notion of opening a restaurant took shape. She has teamed up with Syed Haider, who managed Sapphire, Bombay Palace and Akbar in Manhattan, and they hired Bachan Rawat and Arif Ahmed to share the executive chef position. Tandoori specialties, Indian breads and desserts like gulab jamun fill the menu. (Wednesday)

The chef and restaurateur Marcus Samuelsson opened a stand for his fried chicken in Yankee Stadium in time for the New York City Football Club season. A hotbird fried chicken sandwich and chili cheese fries are on the menu. He has also been named the chief culinary coach for the soccer team. 

What began as a pop-up dining club now has a more permanent home for its $365 all-inclusive tasting dinners, Thursdays and Fridays at 7 p.m. and Saturdays at 5:30 and 8:30 p.m. Carlos Gasperi, a wine lover and a scholar of German literature, found a speakeasy-style space for his sideline and hired a chef, Brendan Skibar, who worked at the Modern and others, to bring it to the table for 20 guests at each sitting. Previously, Dr. Gasperi had a rotating roster of chefs and locations. 

The first franchise of this Lower East Side Italian ice cream specialist — in Montclair, N.J. — was successful enough that another will open in Hoboken, at 500 Washington Street (Fifth Street). Jon Snyder, the founder, has agreed to another location, to open in Shanghai, 8 Hengshan Road in the central Xuhui district in May.

Last week, Keith McNally donated $50,000, all the revenue from dinner at Balthazar on March 8, to UNICEF’s Protect Children in Ukraine fund. One of his regular customers, Scott Asen, matched the amount, so $100,000 was donated. Next week, on Tuesday, Mr. McNally will repeat the effort, adding proceeds from dinner at his restaurants Morandi and Minetta Tavern.

Follow NYT Food on Twitter and NYT Cooking on Instagram, Facebook, YouTube and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.