The airline expressed its condolences to the relatives of the passengers and crew members on the Boeing 737-800. Rain was forecast at the accident site, which is likely to hamper rescue efforts.

A passenger plane with over 130 people on board crashed on Monday afternoon in a mountainous area of southern China, the Civil Aviation Administration of China confirmed, prompting rescue teams to rush to the steep, heavily wooded site in hope of finding survivors.

The Boeing 737 plane, operated by China Eastern Airlines, went down in the Guangxi region, and flames and smoke could be seen rising from a hillside, initial Chinese news reports said, according to pictures and videos shared from the scene. The fire was put out later Monday.

“The situation with casualties remains unclear,” said an online report issued by Chinese state television.

Residents in the area told reporters that the plane appeared to have shattered into debris, dampening hopes of finding survivors. The company offered its condolences to the relatives of those on board in a news statement.

Initial reports said the plane, Flight 5735, crashed in Teng County in Guangxi while flying from Kunming, a city in southwest China, to Guangzhou, a city in the country’s far south. The plane was carrying 132 people, including 123 passengers and 9 crew members, according to the civil aviation administration. State media reports initially said 133 passengers were on board.

China’s top leader, Xi Jinping, quickly issued a statement calling for rescuers to do their utmost and “handle the aftermath in a proper manner.” The Chinese central government dispatched officials to the scene to deal with the disaster and investigation into its causes.

“Ensure the absolute safety of civil aviation operations,” Mr. Xi said in his instructions.

Officials in China have dispatched nearly 1,000 firefighters and 100 members of a local militia on a rescue mission to the site. According to Guangxi’s fire department, 117 emergency workers with about two dozen fire trucks have arrived on the scene.

The plane, about seven years old, had been flying steadily on this flight until it abruptly lost altitude at around 2:20 p.m., flight data indicated.

The plane was not a Boeing 737 Max, a model that has not resumed flying in China after a ban prompted by deadly crashes in Indonesia in 2018 and Ethiopia in 2019. 

Chinese state media said the airline has confirmed that there were no foreign passengers aboard the plane.

Family members of the flight’s crew have begun to gather at a China Eastern Airlines office in Yunnan Province, according to Chinese state media. The southwestern city of Kunming, where the plane took off, is the capital of Yunnan. A team is being set up at that office to assist the families.

The crash could become one of China’s worst air disasters in many years, after a succession of deadly accidents in the 1990s. Over the past two decades, the country has established a relatively safe flying record, thanks to a young fleet of planes and stricter air controls.

Firefighters in Teng County were first alerted to a possible flight accident there in the afternoon, when villagers reported that they had come across debris from a plane, the China News Service reported.

By Monday night, more than 100 firefighters had arrived at the scene, with nearly 1,000 more on their way, according to Chinese officials. But the nighttime rescue efforts are expected to be hampered by the rains and heavy winds in the forecast.

The thunderous boom rippled across a tree-covered valley at midafternoon. China Eastern Airlines Flight MU-5735 had plunged to earth in a hilly part of rural southern China, where usually the loudest noises come from swarms of insects and villagers’ motorbikes.

At first, residents in Teng County in the Guangxi region were baffled by the explosion, they told Chinese news outlets. But soon those gathering around a hillside saw the signs of what may be China’s worst air accident in decades.

Plumes of smoke floated over the clusters of bamboo and banana trees. Farmers came across shards of wreckage, apparently from the plane’s wings and fuselage, some showing the lettering of China Eastern Airlines. And villagers gathered to put out some of the fires that had broken out in the hills, one said in a telephone interview with The New York Times.

Residents told Chinese news outlets that the plane, a Boeing 737 model, plunged sharply to earth in a sparsely populated area.

According to the state-owned China News Service, a resident from the village of Molang, whom the news service cited by only his last name, Liu, said he rode his motorbike to the site with three other villagers to see if they could help with the rescue. They saw parts of the plane scattered on the site, strips of cloth hanging on trees, and a fire that stretched across more than 10 acres. But they didn’t see any remains, he told the news service.

In an interview on state-owned TV, Ou Ling, a fire department official in Guangxi, noted that the crash site is “a depression that is surrounded by mountains on three sides,” adding that “there is no electricity at the site.”

The remote nature of the site makes it inaccessible to large rescue equipment, he said.

He said that public security officials had arrived to secure the scene and that, in order to avoid endangering rescue workers, “unnecessary rescue forces have been withdrawn and are now on standby, while emergency teams such as firefighters and armed police were retained on site to carry out work.”

Nearly 1,000 firefighters and 100 members of a local militia were dispatched by Chinese officials to the crash site. As night fell, the forecast called for rain and heavy winds, weather sure to hamper the rescue effort. 

At the flight’s scheduled destination, Guangzhou Baiyun International Airport, some 150 miles away, friends and relatives who had gone there to greet arriving passengers from the flight now waited for news of any survivors among the 132 onboard.

China Eastern Airlines’ Flight MU-5735 left Kunming, the capital of Yunnan Province, at 1:11 p.m. on Monday for what should have been an hour-and-a-half flight east to Guangzhou, a major commercial city in southeastern China.

After an hour, though, the flight turned horribly wrong, according to data from Flightradar24, a tracking platform.

About 2:20 p.m., it “suddenly started to lose altitude very fast,” Flightradar24 said in a tweet.

The plane was cruising at an altitude of 29,100 feet when, in just over a minute, it lost more than 21,000 feet. It appeared to briefly regain altitude around 8,000 feet before continuing its plunge, according to Flightradar24’s data.

A manager for Wuzhou City Beichen Mining, Liao Wenhui, confirmed by telephone that their surveillance camera caught an image that appeared to be a plane plunging directly toward earth, but refused to say more.

The plane was in the far east of the Guangxi region, where weather reports don’t suggest any possible contributing factors. Temperatures reached a high of 86 degrees Fahrenheit around 2 p.m., according to the China Meteorological Administration. Winds were moderate at less than 12 miles per hour, and visibility was 10 miles. Rain was forecast for the evening, but no precipitation had been measured at the time of the crash.

The crash of a Boeing airliner in China on Monday follows years of upheaval for the American manufacturer, raising the prospect of renewed regulatory scrutiny and sending its stock sharply lower.

Boeing shares were off 5 percent shortly after the start of Wall Street trading, a few hours after a Boeing 737-800 NG operated by China Eastern plunged from the sky on a domestic flight with 130 people aboard. China Eastern shares ended Monday 6.5 percent lower in trading in Hong Kong.

Boeing issued a short statement, saying, “We are aware of the initial media reports and are working to gather more information.”

The Federal Aviation Administration said that it “is ready to assist in investigation efforts if asked.”

If China requests help from the U.S. government in carrying out an investigation, the National Transportation Safety Board, which conducts crash investigations, would be the lead agency to provide it. That agency said on Twitter that it was “monitoring” the crash.

There are nearly 25,000 passenger planes in service worldwide, according to Cirium, an aviation data provider. Of those, about 4,200, or 17 percent, are Boeing 737-800 NGs. China is home to nearly 1,200 of those planes, followed by Europe, with nearly 1,000, and the United States, with nearly 800.

American Airlines has 265 737-800 NGs in service, while Southwest Airlines has 205, United Airlines has 136 and Delta Air Lines has 77, according to Cirium. Boeing delivered nearly 5,000 of the planes to customers between 1998 and 2020, according to Boeing data.

China is one of Boeing’s largest markets. Last year, the company forecast that the number of commercial planes there would double by 2040, with Chinese airlines needing 8,700 new aircraft by then, valued at about $1.47 trillion.

BEIJING — The plane that crashed on Monday in southern China was a Boeing 737-800, a mainstay of airline fleets around the world with a strong safety record.

The model is part of Boeing’s so-called Next Generation line of narrow-body jets that have a maximum range of over 3,000 miles, but are commonly used on shorter routes.

The 737-800 is an older model. Some airlines were shifting to the 737-Max, a newer narrow-body plane. The 737-Max was temporarily grounded worldwide after two of them crashed nearly four years ago.

The 737-Max was widely criticized after one of them crashed in Indonesia in late 2018 and a second crashed in Ethiopia. The Max was grounded worldwide after the second crash, in March 2019. Boeing ended up making a series of changes to the aircraft before it was approved again for commercial service in most countries 20 months later.

China waited longer than most countries to allow the 737-Max to resume flying, however. China’s aviation regulators only granted approval in early December, and demanded that Chinese airlines prove that they had made all of Boeing’s changes before they could actually start flying them on commercial routes again.

Chinese airlines have made these changes and are still testing the planes, so the 737-Max is not yet back in service in mainland China, said David Yu, a finance professor specializing in aviation at the Shanghai campus of New York University.

Boeing agreed in January of last year to pay over $2.5 billion in a fine to the Justice Department to resolve a criminal charge that the company conspired to defraud the Federal Aviation Administration, which regulates Boeing and evaluates its planes.

The criminal charge against the company involved the actions of two employees who did not share information with the F.A.A. about changes made to computer software on the 737-Max. That software was later implicated in both crashes.

Even before rescuers had began working through the plane wreckage, China’s leader, Xi Jinping, issued orders to spare no effort to rescue any survivors from the country’s worst aviation crash in many years.

“Instantly initiate the emergency response mechanisms and put everything into organizing search and rescue,” Mr. Xi said in instructions issued by Chinese official news outlets. “Step up safety checks in the civil aviation sector,” he added. “Ensure that people’s lives are absolutely safe.”

That promise of safety for Chinese citizens has become an important symbol of Mr. Xi’s authority. Mr. Xi, China’s most dominant leader in decades, has often cast the ruling Communist Party as the country’s savior. The air crash — the country’s first big aviation disaster in over a decade — will add to the issues facing him amid the pandemic and a war in Ukraine.

The Chinese government has been grappling with its biggest outbreak of Covid-19 cases since early in 2020, when the coronavirus spread out from central China.

With the war in Ukraine, Chinese officials had at first dismissed the likelihood of war and did not announce plans to evacuate citizens. After Russia invaded Ukraine, Beijing scrambled to evacuate Chinese nationals.

Last year, local officials faced widespread public anger after nearly 400 people died in central China’s Henan Province after immense rainfall in July flooded tunnels, subways and homes.

Most Chinese people are unlikely to hold Mr. Xi personally accountable for an airplane disaster. But his promise of accountability for the crash will raise expectations for a quick and thorough inquiry into why the China Eastern Airlines flight plunged to the ground.

Chinese state media also reported that the premier, Li Keqiang, ordered that officials “issue information truthfully and promptly, and conscientiously and solemnly get to the cause of the accident.”

BEIJING — The plane crash on Monday in southern China is unusual in a country that had a spate of deadly air accidents in the early 1990s but then overhauled its procedures and produced one of the world’s best air safety records over the past two decades.

“Historically it was questionable, but in the new era, it has been very good from a safety point of view,” said David Yu, a finance professor specializing in aviation at the Shanghai campus of New York University.

The Chinese airline industry has one of the world’s newer fleets of planes, and is considerably newer than the American fleet. That is because Chinese airlines have been among the world’s biggest buyers of new planes over the past decade, as rising prosperity in China has fed a big surge in domestic and international air travel.

Until the pandemic, Chinese airlines hired a sizable share of their pilots from overseas, as air travel grew faster than China’s ability to train its own pilots. China developed a reputation for offering some of the world’s highest salaries for experienced foreign pilots.

But many of these foreign pilots returned to their home countries in the past couple years as China has halted almost all international air travel during the pandemic, and as domestic travel has shrunk somewhat as well. Chinese airlines now rely almost entirely on Chinese pilots, Mr. Yu said.

China has been designing its own alternative to the Boeing 737-800 that crashed on Monday. That alternative, the C-919, is being built in Shanghai by a state-owned company. China Eastern is set to be the first airline to operate the C-919 in the months ahead, through one of its subsidiaries.

China Eastern Airlines is the second-largest carrier by passengers in China, operating hundreds of planes on domestic and international routes.

Based in Shanghai, the airline flies to 177 countries, according to its website. The Boeing 737 that crashed on Monday in southern China was a twin-engine, single aisle aircraft. It had been flying for over six years, having been delivered to China Eastern from Boeing in June 2015, according to The Associated Press.

“The cause of the plane crash is still under investigation, and the company will actively cooperate with relevant investigations,” the airline said in a statement on Monday night.

“The company expresses its deep condolences to the passengers and crew members who died in the plane crash.”

The airline traces its lineage back to the first squadron established by what was then the Civil Aviation Administration of Shanghai in January 1957. China Eastern Airlines Corporation Limited was established in 1988 and listed on stock exchanges in New York, Hong Kong and Shanghai in 1997. It became, according to a company profile, the first airline listed on three markets together.

The Chinese government is a major shareholder.

Over the years, China Eastern has been awarded the Golden Ting Award, Best Public Company, World Most Improved Airline, and Most Popular Airlines in Asia, the airline says.

After the crash on Monday, the company’s Weibo page changed to gray, black and white, as did its website in China. 

China Eastern Airlines has a history of safe flying and has gone nearly two decades without a deadly crash, according to aviation safety databases. But in its earlier history, the airline had a series of disasters.

The last deadly Chinese Eastern crash was in 2004, when a Bombardier CRJ-200 flying from the city of Baotou in Inner Mongolia to Shanghai plunged into a frozen lake shortly after takeoff, killing 55 people. The disaster was caused by ice on the wings, safety regulators said.

In 1989, just over a year after the airline was founded, an Antonov AN-24RV lost engine power on takeoff from Shanghai, killing 34. In 1993, a China Eastern crew member accidentally deployed slats on the wings of a McDonnell Douglas MD-11, forcing an emergency landing at a U.S. Air Force base in Alaska. Two passengers died.