Some of the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament’s best moments are birthed from classic David and Goliath matchups. The Goliaths, those powerhouse programs that make deep tournament runs seem routine, meet the Davids, the upstart challengers that many college basketball fans know nothing about until March.

This matchup between the No. 2 seed Duke and the No. 7 seed Michigan State instead offered a classic Goliath versus Goliath: One college basketball juggernaut against another. Two revered coaches, the Blue Devils’ Mike Krzyzewski, and the Spartans’ Tom Izzo, facing each other one final time. And in a game befitting the careers of two coaches who have been among the faces of their sport for decades, Duke outlasted Michigan State, 85-76, in the round of 32, extending its season and the career of the man nicknamed Coach K for at least one more game.

“What a game,” Krzyzewski said afterward. “It was reminiscent of Elite Eight, Final Four games.”

For now, Krzyzewski’s farewell tour remains intact. On its way to the tournament, Duke clinched the Atlantic Coast Conference’s regular-season title, but then lost to rival North Carolina in Krzyzewski’s final home game. It lost again to Virginia Tech in the A.C.C. tournament final in Brooklyn before dominating Cal State Fullerton in the first round and holding off Izzo and Michigan State on Sunday night.

“We didn’t maybe follow the game plan totally,” Izzo said. “And some of that is because sometimes some guys are bigger, stronger and quicker.”

With six minutes left, the game was tied at 65. Michigan State’s Marcus Bingham Jr., who had been so good all evening, nailed a 3-point jumper amid a 9-0 Spartans run, which led to a 5-point lead. But Duke, making plays on both ends of the floor, with a pair of blocks, a steal and a key 3-pointer by sophomore guard Jeremy Roach, regained the lead for good with less than three minutes left.

Krzyzewski gleefully praised Roach’s 15-point performance and clutch shot.

“He willed that ball in,” Krzyzewski said. “They were some of the best drives I’ve seen as the Duke coach, really, especially in a pressure situation.”

For 40 minutes, the two teams swung at each other. Michigan State, with its stifling defense, cut off the Blue Devils’ driving lanes, forcing jump shots, and Duke happily obliged.

The Blue Devils countered the Spartans’ early lead by getting their best players going. Paolo Banchero, Duke’s all-American freshman forward, had 10 points by halftime. Banchero attacked the Spartans’ interior defense with his towering 6-foot-10 frame and finished with 19 points.

“It’s the N.C.A.A. tournament. The season’s on the line every single game,” Banchero said in a news conference, still wiping sweat from his forehead. “That’s really all that needs to be said. We knew that.”

The Spartans matched Duke’s intensity nearly the whole game by proving as fiery on the court as Izzo, their veteran coach, whose wide-legged stance on the sideline could not be missed. Gabe Brown, Michigan State’s senior forward, had 14 points in the first half, including three baskets from beyond the arc.

“Last year I was mad at my team at the end,” Izzo said, referring to the Spartans’ collapse against U.C.L.A. in last season’s play-in round. “This year, I’m proud of my team at the end.”

After relinquishing an early lead and allowing Banchero and center Mark Williams to get shots in the post, Michigan State matched the Blue Devils’ 3-point shooting. The teams swapped 3-pointers on five straight possessions to end the first half.

In the second half, Duke players muscled their way to the glass to score inside. But Michigan State kept climbing back, not letting the Blue Devils get comfortable until the final free throws put the game away.

And Duke, the team with Final Four potential and the coach with the most wins in Division I men's basketball history, was the Goliath that would not fall.

— Alanis Thames

Above the white sock, his lower right leg was still purple. The bruising was still evident. But Kerr Kriisa, Arizona’s starting point guard, was back and the Wildcats were feeling better than ever.

With Kriisa’s leg matching Texas Christian’s purple uniforms, instead it was the Horned Frogs who were left feeling bruised following an exhilarating overtime classic. Arizona won, 85-80, survived a serious second-round scare and left the Horned Frogs on the court depleted. Several appeared near tears. Others pulled their jerseys up over their heads as they exited the floor.

By the end, No. 1-seeded Arizona picked up even more momentum while advancing toward a round of 16 matchup with Houston Thursday in San Antonio.

Kriisa, who directs the Arizona offense with the aplomb of a symphony conductor and the facial expressions of a skilled actor, badly sprained an ankle in a Pac 12 Conference tournament quarterfinal game against Stanford on March 10. He hadn’t played since and the Wildcats couldn’t wait for his return.

They got it just in time. They needed every man on board to beat T.C.U. Following an incredible sequence in which the Wildcats grabbed three offensive rebounds on the same possession before Bennedict Mathurin finally scored to give the Wildcats an 83-80 lead, the Horned Frogs called timeout with 56.7 seconds to play. But Chuck O’Bannon Jr. missed a 3-pointer, Arizona collected the rebound and then, on an Arizona missed 3, Christian Koloko came roaring through the air to dunk the rebound and extend Arizona’s lead to 85-80.

Finally, it was too much to overcome for T.C.U., which had visions of making Arizona the second No. 1 seed of the tournament to disappear, following Baylor’s tripping by North Carolina on Saturday. Gonzaga, meanwhile, deflected a couple of scares from Georgia State and Memphis.

This was the definition of survive-and-advance. Texas Christian fought through several roadblocks, climbed out of many holes. It chased the Wildcats down to the game’s final minute and survived Mathurin’s 3-pointer to tie the game at 75-75 with 14 seconds left to move into overtime.

Kriisa played 26 minutes, and Arizona needed every one of them. Mathurin led all scorers with 30 points and was enormous at the end. Koloko, the Pac 12 defensive player of the year, scored 28 points, grabbed 12 rebounds and had 3 blocks.

O’Bannon led the Frogs with 23 points, including going 5 of 11 from 3-point territory. Eddie Lampkin Jr. and Mike Miles added 20 points apiece, with Lampkin also grabbing 10 offensive rebounds and 14 overall.

— Scott Miller

One year after reaching the Final Four of the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament, Houston is making another run. This time, it is doing it with five new starters and an overhauled roster.

The Cougars, a No. 5 seed, advanced to the round of 16 for the third straight tournament with a 68-53 victory over fourth-seeded Illinois on Sunday afternoon in Pittsburgh. Houston, which lost in last year’s national semifinals to the eventual national champion, Baylor, advanced to meet the winner of Sunday night’s game between No. 1 Arizona and No. 9 Texas Christian in the South regional.

“I just think these guys stand on the shoulders of all those players that came before them,” Houston Coach Kelvin Sampson, who advanced to the round of 16 for the sixth time in his career, said in a television interview. “They believe in our culture. We talk about watering trees. We don’t water leaves; we water roots, and the roots in this program is our culture, and every one of these kids buys into it. That’s why we’re successful.”

Houston (31-5), the American Athletic Conference tournament champion, had not beaten a single-digit seed in the tournament since the 1984 Final Four, when Hakeem Olajuwon and Clyde Drexler were the Cougars’ stars. Illinois (23-10) lost in the second round for the second straight year after being among the top seeds. In 2021, it was upset by Loyola Chicago as a No. 1 seed.

Three of last year’s Final Four teams have advanced to the round of 16, with Gonzaga and U.C.L.A. having won Saturday. Baylor lost Saturday to North Carolina, meaning the defending champion has now lost before the round of 16 for five years straight.

Sampson lost all five of last year’s starters, who either moved on or suffered injuries. Quentin Grimes, a key player on last year’s team, now plays for the Knicks. The junior guard Marcus Sasser, who scored 20 points in last year’s national semifinal, went down with a season-ending injury, as did the sophomore guard Tramon Mark.

Still, Houston has maintained its trademark defensive intensity, and it often seems as if it has seven defenders on the floor instead of five. The Cougars limited Illinois to 34 percent shooting from the field. Houston used an 11-0 run to go ahead, 65-49, and put the game out of reach.

Offensively, the senior guard Taze Moore was terrific in the open court, finishing with 21 points and 7 rebounds. Jamal Shead scored 18 and Kyler Edwards, a member of Texas Tech’s 2019 Final Four team, had 15 points, 6 rebounds and 4 assists.

Kofi Cockburn, Illinois’s 7-foot, 285-pound all-American big man, finished with 19 points and 8 rebounds in what was likely his final college game.

— Adam Zagoria

The No. 2-seeded Auburn Tigers’ fate seemed evident late in the first half against Miami.

Isaiah Wong, the Hurricanes’ third-year guard, split the Auburn defense and barreled toward the basket before elevating over Jabari Smith, Auburn’s skillful forward who figures to be on his way to the N.B.A., for a right-handed slam. It was one of the best plays of the night for the Hurricanes, a talented, confident group but a heavy underdog against the Tigers, winners of the Southeastern Conference’s regular-season title and once the top-ranked team in Division I.

That didn’t seem to matter to the 10th-seeded Hurricanes, who controlled nearly their entire matchup against Auburn on Sunday en route to a 79-61 win in the second round of the N.C.A.A. tournament.

“I was tuned in to the games before us, and I listened to Charles Barkley tell the CBS crew that if Auburn won he would take off his shirt,” Miami’s Coach Jim Larrañaga said after his team beat Auburn, where Barkley played in college. “And I thought to myself, ‘Man, no one wants to see that, Chuck.’”

Wong led the way, following a 22-point performance in the first round against Southern California with 21 points and 6 rebounds in 36 minutes against Auburn.

Miami played a nearly mistake-free 40 minutes of basketball, turning the ball over only four times compared to 13 Auburn turnovers that yielded 17 points for the Hurricanes. The speed and quickness of the Hurricanes, significantly undersized compared to Auburn, was their advantage. They outscored Auburn on the fast break 30 to 1.

Smith, a deft shooter and Auburn’s leading scorer all season, finished with just 10 points, well below his season average of 17.2 points per game, though he did haul in 15 rebounds.

“When you play against great players, and you’re analyzing their game, there are certain things that repeat themselves,” Larrañaga said. He added: “He’s a great shooter. And shooters like space and like rhythm. We needed to take that space and rhythm away.”

So Jordan Miller, Miami’s fourth-year guard who had 12 points, followed Smith for most of the game, and the Hurricanes threw double teams at him (and at Walker Kessler, the Tigers’ starting center) when he went into the post.

“That’s the whole thing with shooters,” Larrañaga said, “if you let them get into a rhythm, Jabari could have made 10 threes tonight if he was in rhythm.”

With the loss, Auburn joined Baylor, a No. 1 seed, No. 3 seeded-Wisconsin and fourth-seeded Illinois on the losing end of the second-round matchups on Sunday. The Tigers have made the N.C.A.A. tournament three times under Coach Bruce Pearl, reaching the Final Four in 2019.

“My best player is 18. They have four players that are 24,” Pearl said. “That experience showed.”

He added: “We hadn’t been hit in the mouth like that all year.”

— Alanis Thames

Villanova point guard Collin Gillespie was heartbroken a year ago when he missed the N.C.A.A. tournament after a medial collateral ligament tear in his left knee in early March.

A 6-foot-3 Pennsylvania native, he opted to return to Villanova for a fifth season after the N.C.A.A. granted a waiver to all players in the wake of the pandemic, and now he is making the most of his final season.

After leading the Wildcats to their sixth Big East tournament championship, Gillespie had 20 points and 4 assists to guide second-seeded Villanova into the round of 16 for a second consecutive season with a 71-61 victory over seventh-seeded Ohio State in Pittsburgh. Gillespie’s assist to Eric Dixon led to a 3-pointer that put Villanova ahead, 67-59, with 1 minute 38 seconds remaining after Ohio State had come within 2 points. He hit two free throws in the final seconds to secure the victory.

“It means everything, it’s part of the reason why I came back,” Gillespie said in a television interview after the Big East tournament. “Not being able to play with those guys last year hurt. But I’m just happy I’m able to play with these guys back on the floor, postseason especially.”

The fifth-year senior Jermaine Samuels had 17 points and 8 rebounds, and Caleb Daniels added 11 points and 8 rebounds for Villanova, which has won seven straight games and 12 of its last 13. The Wildcats (28-7) will next face No. 11 Michigan (19-14) in a South regional game on Thursday in San Antonio.

Under the Hall of Fame coach Jay Wright, Villanova won N.C.A.A. titles in 2016 and 2018, the latter when Gillespie was a freshman. He and the Wildcats remain alive for what could be the program’s third championship since 2016.

Gillespie has been the face of the program for the last several years and now ranks 13th in program history in points and 10th in assists.

Ohio State’s E.J. Liddell had 17 points, 6 rebounds and 3 assists in what was likely his final college game before he heads to the N.B.A. draft. The Ohio State freshman guard Malaki Branham, a borderline first-round N.B.A. pick, had a stellar performance with a game-best 23 points, including 3 of 8 from beyond the arc.

— Adam Zagoria

SAN DIEGO — Texas Tech’s players came as advertised. They bumped, they grinded, they switched and they dared Notre Dame to bring its offense into the middle of the floor. And for another night, as the Red Raiders’ offense also lived down to its reputation, it worked.

The Red Raiders stonewalled Notre Dame’s storybook week — and season — with a 59-53 win despite shooting 35.6 percent from the field. As a result, Texas Tech advanced to the round of 16 on Thursday against Duke in San Francisco.

“The ball’s going to go in some nights, and some nights it’s not,” Kevin McCullar, the Texas Tech guard, said. “We know one thing that will be consistent is our defense and effort. We want to be the hardest-playing team out there, always.”

After a double-overtime classic against Rutgers in a play-in game and a spirited first-round win over Alabama on Friday, the Fighting Irish simply could not overcome the nation’s leader in defensive efficiency. It was a defensive battle that at times was more rock fight than ballet. What it lacked in artistry it made up for in grit.

Texas Tech’s bigs were too much for Notre Dame inside in the first half, holding the Irish to just 25 percent from the field (7 for 28). The Irish’s best chance early was shooting over the Texas Tech defense, and their 31 percent success from 3-point range (5 for 16) in the first half pulled them to within 26-25 at halftime.

But the margin for error was slim. Paul Atkinson Jr., who popped for a game-high 26 points against Rutgers on Wednesday, was limited to 5 points — and one field goal — by the Red Raiders. And Texas Tech held the sharpshooter Cormac Ryan, coming off a career-high 29 points against Alabama on Friday, to just 9 points. For the game, Notre Dame shot 32.7 percent. Still, the Irish had a chance to win into the final minute because Texas Tech shot only 32.1 percent in the second half.

Notre Dame had difficulty controlling forward Kevin Obanor, who led Texas Tech with 15 points. In fact, Obanor, Bryson Williams and McCullar (14 points apiece) combined to score 43 of Texas Tech’s 59 points.

— Scott Miller

Playing in its home state, No. 3 Wisconsin had a prime opportunity to advance to the round of 16. Instead, the Badgers fell, 54-49, to Iowa State, a No. 11 seed that has made it out of the first weekend after back-to-back upset victories over other Power 5 programs.

The Cyclones returned to the round of 16 for the first time since 2017 behind 22 points from Gabe Kalscheur.

Wisconsin’s plans for a home-friendly trip to the Final Four were upended by Iowa State, which turned the game into a happy homecoming for two of its own — Iowa State Coach T.J. Otzelberger, born and bred in Milwaukee, and his freshman point guard Tyrese Hunter, from Racine.

The game was played in Milwaukee, about 70 miles from the Madison, Wis., and roars greeted every Wisconsin surge. Next up, the caravan would have headed down the road to Chicago for the regional semifinals with a Final Four in sight.