CRESS WATERCRESSBy Gregory MaguireIllustrated by David Litchfield

THE SHEEP, THE ROOSTER, AND THE DUCKBy Matt Phelan

On the surface, Gregory Maguire’s “Cress Watercress” and Matt Phelan’s “The Sheep, the Rooster, and the Duck” have a lot in common: They both feature animal protagonists, perilous journeys and illustrations that are essential to the storytelling. But if these books were songs, they’d sound nothing alike.

“Cress Watercress” is the sadder song. In the book’s brief opening chapters, the rabbits Cress (short for Cressida), her mother and her baby brother are grief-stricken. Cress’s father has disappeared, and the family has packed up and is on the move. During the moonlight journey to their new home, Cress is startled to see a fox with “busy” jaws and “a mouthful of hen,” and asks, “Did a fox get Papa?” Cress’s mother knows in her heart that her husband isn’t coming back, yet she tells Cress to hush, adding, “We may never know what happened to Papa.” Cress isn’t sure what to make of her mother’s answer. Isn’t it possible that her father could come back? If so, why are they moving? Shouldn’t they stay put and wait for his return?

Cress’s family’s new home — “basement lodgings” at the Broken Arms — is a small, windowless room in the roots of an old dead oak tree. Mr. Titus Pillowby Owl, their landlord, makes it clear that failing to pay their rent, 10 moths a night, will cost them their apartment or, if his appetites change, their lives. Death and menace lurk everywhere. Besides the fox, Cress is warned of a snake (nicknamed “the Final Drainpipe”), a bear and humans, who live in “a war zone.” She hears her mother speak of her father’s untimely death as a result of “a step too far in a dangerous direction.”

For writers, there are plenty of reasons to turn to anthropomorphized animals. They can quickly elicit empathy from readers while simultaneously providing the distance necessary to better process intense personal feelings and trauma (like the death of a parent). There’s also a comedic aspect to animal characters dressed in human clothes going about their business (the denizens of Richard Scarry’s “Busytown” immediately come to mind).

Maguire’s menagerie includes a narcissistic skunk, a ditsy hen and a mouse with a borscht belt sense of humor who “used to do impressions on the circuit.” In a story about grief and loss, comic relief is welcome, but this cast of characters’ quips, quirks and signature phrases often cross into shtick.

Fortunately, David Litchfield’s luminous illustrations beautifully flesh out these characters. Like Mama Watercress’s woven tapestries, the artwork is alive with color and helps braid a pastiche of elements into a vivid and cohesive whole.

“Cress Watercress” is most convincing on Cress’s inner life. Maguire’s descriptions of her dark moods, bursts of anger and fear that she will end up like her father are piercing and sensitively written. With great subtlety, Maguire (“Wicked,” “Egg & Spoon”) even touches on suicidal ideation: When Cress tells a squirrel friend, “I’ll just lie down with my paws over my eyes and wait for the Final Drainpipe to come across me,” it can’t be dismissed as a joke.

Ultimately, Cress finds that sorrow, like the waxing and waning moon, is a part of life. As her mother tells her, “You learn you can live through the moonless nights.” With this understanding, Cress endures and the story strikes a resonant chord: Like Cress, we must all continue to seek pleasure and connections in a dangerous and uncertain world.

Another reason writers may be drawn to anthropomorphized animals is for their absurdity. Once readers accept the reality of talking animals, what else will they buy into? In Matt Phelan’s up-tempo “The Sheep, the Rooster, and the Duck,” the answer is this: Three 18th-century French animal aeronauts also happen to be the most extraordinary secret agents in the world.

The premise, absurd as it is, is rooted in a bit of aviation history. In 1783 Versailles, before a crowd of thousands, the first hot-air balloon with passengers took flight. With King Louis XVI and Marie Antoinette looking on, a sheep, a rooster and a duck stayed afloat for 15 minutes before crashing back down to earth. The animals all survived. What they probably did not do was go on to advise the Royal Navy, invent more ingenious airships and prevent a deadly heat ray (invented by none other than Benjamin Franklin) from falling into the wrong hands.

Without breaking a sweat, Phelan (“Knights vs. Dinosaurs”) spins an intoxicating yarn featuring secret societies, swordplay and spycraft. The swashbuckling rooster Pierre, the inventive sheep Bernadette and the strategic duck Jean-Luc are as winning and self-assured as Phelan’s brisk and clever writing. A parade of historical personalities figure prominently in the plot and add to the fun. The author’s note at the end helps separate facts from flights of fancy. Readers may have heard of Mozart, but they’re less likely to be familiar with the French chemist Antoine Lavoisier, the English spy Edward Bancroft or the book’s colorful villain, Count Alessandro Cagliostro.

Phelan’s Cagliostro claims he is 3,002 years old and in possession of “enormous wealth and power.” He plans to establish himself in the New World as “the King of America,” a country “susceptible” to charlatans like him. “The King of Liars,” Pierre retorts, “is a menace to all creatures.”

Unlike Litchfield’s strikingly rendered narrative tableaus, Phelan’s penciled illustrations are drawn in a breezy style not meant to stop us in our tracks. Instead, the book’s 40-plus pages of comics have the opposite effect; these loosely sketched but tightly choreographed “comics sequences” (as the publisher calls them) propel us through his page-turner at an even more accelerated pace. “The Sheep, the Rooster, and the Duck” isn’t quite a graphic novel, nor is it a straight-up illustrated book; it’s neither fish nor fowl. It is, however, sheep and fowl, and it will be hard for young readers to put down.