THE COPENHAGEN TRILOGY: Childhood; Youth; Dependency,  by Tove Ditlevsen. Translated by Tiina Nunnally and Michael Favala Goldman. (Picador, 384 pp., $20.) This collection of Ditlevesen’s memoirs, first published in Denmark in the 1960s and ’70s, describes her impoverished upbringing, career path and unsparing addictions. This “unstinting account of the struggle to reconcile art and life,” as our reviewer, Megan O’Grady, called it, was one of the Book Review’s 10 Best Books of 2021.

BLOOD GROVE, by Walter Mosley. (Mulholland, 320 pp., $16.99.) In 1969, Easy Rawlins, the Black and aging private detective, takes a case in which a young white vet thinks he killed a man. Our reviewer, Sarah Weinman, wrote that this novel illustrates “the country as it was, and is, rather than the stuff of myths and dreams.”

TOM STOPPARD: A Life, by Hermione Lee. (Vintage, 912 pp., $20.) According to the Times critic Dwight Garner, this biography, an “estimable” as well as “astute and authoritative” account of the Czech-born Jewish playwright’s enormous life, “wrestles it all onto the page.” It was selected as one of the Times Critics top books of 2021.

THIS IS THE FIRE: What I Say to My Friends About Racism, by Don Lemon. (Back Bay, 224 pp., $17.99.) This book is written as a letter from the CNN host to his nephew after the police killing of George Floyd in 2020, but “it’s hard not to picture Lemon speaking each sentence through a camera to an unseen audience of millions,” our reviewer, Wesley Lowery, wrote. Lemon seamlessly jumps between sections on America’s past and reflections on his own life, “blending our nation’s history with his own.”

INSIDE STORY, by Martin Amis. (Vintage, 560 pp., $18.) “Amis’s saw-toothed sentences seized me by the scruff and carried me off for good,” the former Times critic Parul Sehgal commented in her review of “Inside Story.” This “novelized autobiography,” which Sehgal called “an unstable and charismatic compound of fact and fiction,” traces significant influences in Amis’s life and explores the questions of how to grieve, how to live a life and how to die.

STRANGE BEASTS OF CHINA, by Yan Ge. Translated by Jeremy Tiang. (Melville House, 240 pp., $17.99.) An amateur cryptozoologist is commissioned to uncover the stories of the legendary and elusive beasts in a fictional Chinese city where, our reviewer, Stephen Kearse, noted, “human and beast exist in constant flux, clashing, merging and splintering with tectonic regularity.”