Brian Gari has a background in theater, but nothing could prepare him for the drama of his first years of marriage to Jeanne Cathcart.

Six months before their first anniversary came his quadruple bypass. Nine months after that: Ms. Cathcart’s breast cancer diagnosis.

For Mr. Gari, 70, a once-divorced composer and lyricist who is the grandson of the deceased singer and comedian Eddie Cantor, meeting Ms. Cathcart in 2010 had marked the end of a decades-long romantic losing streak. “I had been careful, but I had years’ worth of relationships that bombed,” he said. Some he managed to salvage artistically, through the crafting of ballads and breakup songs.

Ms. Cathcart, 65, a retired pediatric nurse, provided ample inspiration for a 2019 record by her husband, “Jeanne’s Album.” But if two near-death experiences in the span of two years taught them anything, it was the rightness of their decision to marry in 2011, just six months after their first date.

Mr. Gari’s attraction to Ms. Cathcart, who has been divorced twice, started with her last name. For a Beach Boys-inspired record that her first husband, the singer and voice actor James Carter Cathcart, put out in 1999, she had photographed the cover art. Mr. Gari, a lifelong Beach Boys fan, liked the picture.

“I thought, cool cover,” he said. In 2008, he came across her name on Facebook and messaged her. “I said, ‘You wouldn’t be the same person who that took that photo, would you?’” When she confirmed it, they struck up an online friendship that lasted two years, until Ms. Cathcart, a mother of three, neared the finish line of a divorce from her second husband.

Their first date was at the Players Club in Manhattan in October 2010. Ms. Cathcart was then living at a friend’s house in Fair Lawn, N.J., with untidy roommates. “They were three guys,” she said. “Two of them never cleaned.”

Proximity to her children compelled her to move in. Her son, Carter Cathcart, 28, and daughter Mackenzie Cathcart, 27, were living nearby in Englewood. Her daughter Nicole Zoppi, 38, was living in Brooklyn.

Mr. Gari, a native New Yorker who started writing songs at 12 and at last count had tallied 900, including the handful in his 1987 Broadway musical “Late Nite Comic,” had never experienced that kind of domestic upheaval. For 57 years, including the extent of a brief first marriage that ended in divorce in 1987, he has lived in the same Upper West Side apartment.

His parents, the composer Janet Cantor Gari and the actor Roberto Gari, now both deceased, moved in when he was 12. When they divorced a few years later, Mr. Gari’s father moved five blocks away and his mother moved to Midtown. Mr. Gari, then 15, stayed put in the rental. “My mother said, ‘You’re on your own,” he said.

He didn’t realize how right she would be. He was getting used to being an unsatisfied serial monogamist when he fell in love with Ms. Cathcart after the Players Club date. “I knew right away we were right for each other,” he said. “We had been talking so long. And she was so cute.”

She knew, too: “When you’re later in your years, you have a better understanding of the kind of person you want to spend time with,” she said. “Brian was everything I loved: this lanky, just adorable guy.” Within weeks, she had left her messy roommates in New Jersey and moved into his place. Six months later, in April 2011, he proposed while they were crossing the street at 71st and Broadway.

“We were in the middle of a conversation about how she felt lost,” Mr. Gari said. Ms. Cathcart had been having trouble adjusting to life without the support of a spouse.

“I felt a little insecure,” she said. “I didn’t have any money saved, and I didn’t have anyone to help me.” Half a year of living together without any compatibility issues seemed like long enough to both to make a lifetime commitment. They were married in their living room on Oct. 15, 2011, by their friend Sandra B. Wells, a Universal Life Church minister.

Read more updates on couples featured in Vows in our State of the Unions column.

For Mr. Gari, the decision to remarry had been more “why not?” than “can’t wait.”

“I guess I wanted to coast a little,” he said. “But she sounded so sad about where we were in our relationship, because I wasn’t saying, ‘Let’s take the next step.’ I asked her to marry me because I thought, I know by now we were meant for each other.”

And how glad he is. “If I had been with any of those other women I dated, I wouldn’t be alive,” Mr. Gari said.

In April 2012, six months into their marriage, Ms. Cathcart’s nursing instinct kicked in when she saw him struggling to breathe while climbing the subway stairs near their apartment. She insisted he see the cardiologist who told him his heart was 95 percent blocked.

Similarly, Ms. Cathcart’s cancer might have gone undetected if Mr. Gari hadn’t urged her to get a mammogram a year later, when she had no health insurance and was reluctant to pay the $200 price tag for a screening.

The result: A diagnosis of triple-negative breast cancer in December 2013 that was followed by four months of chemotherapy and a double mastectomy. Mr. Gari’s newly unblocked heart enabled him to care for her while she recuperated.

The ordeal, immortalized by Mr. Gari in “Saving Each Other’s Lives,” a song on “Jeanne’s Album,” cinched the drawstring on their marital bond. “Strange to say/We might have lost our way,” he sings on the track.

For the past decade and especially since the pandemic, when both discovered through quarantining that life in Manhattan’s West 90s could be just as fun when pared to a party of two, the couple has felt enveloped by love. They plan to stay in their apartment forever: he continuing to write songs, and she working as a nanny, a new career that got interrupted by the pandemic in 2020.

Their heroics in detecting her cancer and his heart condition, both say, were a lucky side effect of paying close attention to each other not just when it counted, but all the time. “I’m getting choked up right now, just thinking how I could have lost her,” Mr. Gari said. “Whenever she pops into the room, it’s still a joy to see her face.”

That applies to one room especially: the bedroom. Mr. Gari, asked to pick one word for why the marriage works, chose sex. Ms. Cathcart did not disagree. “I was going to say that, too,” she said. Both said physical intimacy was too important to give up, even with their ages advancing and their health scares not far in the rearview.

“It’s just something I don’t ever want to let fall by the wayside in my life,” Mr. Gari said. “I’m very attracted to Jeanne.”

Ms. Cathcart shares his passion. “He makes me laugh,” she said. “It’s a turn-on.”