President Biden’s nominee to the Supreme Court is facing the first of four days before the Senate Judiciary Committee. Senators will take turns making opening statements, and Judge Jackson will deliver her own remarks.

The Senate Judiciary Committee on Monday will kick off a historic set of hearings on President Biden’s nominee for the Supreme Court, Ketanji Brown Jackson, who would be the first Black woman to serve there.

The proceedings will introduce Judge Jackson, who currently sits on the influential U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, to much of the country, and give senators a high-profile opportunity to question her on matters of law and policy.

Here’s how it will unfold and what to keep an eye on.

At 11 a.m., the Senate Judiciary Committee is scheduled to begin the hearing, which is to take place in a cavernous room outfitted in white marble and wood paneling near the Capitol. Senators will take turns making opening statements, and Judge Jackson will deliver her own remarks.

The hearings are very likely to end in Judge Jackson’s confirmation; Democrats can confirm her without a single Republican vote if they stay united. But they would like some G.O.P. support, and Monday’s session will signal how aggressively Republicans plan to question her, an early indicator of her chances of winning anyone over. Republicans have conceded it is a sensitive situation, considering that her confirmation is likely and they are loath to be seen as piling on against a woman of color with a gold-plated legal résumé and a reputation as a solid jurist.

Watch for several likely lines of Republican attack. Senator Mitch McConnell, the Kentucky Republican and minority leader, has made it clear he wants Judge Jackson to state whether she would support adding seats to the court, as some progressive activists want. Republicans will also press her on her representation of terror detainees at the U.S. military base at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba and her work as a public defender in general. Senator Josh Hawley, Republican of Missouri, has raised questions about her sentencing of those accused of sex crimes involving children. Abortion rights are also certain to come up.

Senators will be probing to see how Judge Jackson responds when pressed. Does she remain composed? Do her answers address the questions? Does she have understandable responses to complex issues? How much is she willing to reveal of her judicial philosophy? Temperament is part of the judicial character and carries weight in the confirmation process. In recent decades, nominees have grown increasingly reticent about their views during their confirmation hearings, usually declining to prejudge any issues that might come before the court. But that will not stop senators from asking.

Senators will dig into Judge Jackson’s judicial record, including some rulings she handed down as a Federal District Court judge that were overturned on appeal, such as a decision restraining a Trump administration immigration policy.

Republicans are also taking aim at Judge Jackson’s service on the United States Sentencing Commission, a federal panel formed to review sentencing guidelines and recommend changes to increase transparency and reduce disparities. They say that she favored sentence reductions, but other members of the bipartisan commission say the recommendations were settled by consensus.

All eyes will be on how Judge Jackson sells herself for the job, both to the committee and to the American public. She and her Democratic supporters want her to come across as an exceptionally qualified woman who belongs on a court that has been lacking in diverse voices. Democrats point to her endorsement by law enforcement groups and conservative judicial colleagues as strong evidence that she should win bipartisan support. If Judge Jackson does a compelling job laying out her life story, she could make it more difficult for Republicans to challenge her even as most of them intend to oppose her.

If Judge Ketanji Brown Jackson, President Biden’s Supreme Court pick, is confirmed, she will almost immediately confront a docket for its next term filled with polarizing issues, including the fate of affirmative action in higher education, the role race should play in drawing voting districts and whether businesses open to the public may discriminate against gay couples on religious grounds.

A review of a substantial sample of Judge Jackson’s roughly 500 judicial opinions suggests that she would be about as liberal as the member of the court she hopes to replace, Justice Stephen G. Breyer. That would make her a reliable member of what would continue to be a three-member liberal minority on a court that is dominated by six conservative justices.

Judge Jackson has a substantial judicial track record, having served on federal courts longer than several of the current justices had when they were appointed. But the great bulk of her opinions are from her eight years on the Federal District Court in Washington, as a trial judge, before Mr. Biden elevated her in June to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit.

Those opinions are diligent and exceptionally thorough, exhibiting a sure command of both the facts before her and the relevant legal materials. But they are often less illuminating than appeals court rulings that establish precedents and bind other judges.

In Judge Jackson’s eight months on the appeals court, she has issued just two majority opinions, and they have been crisp and forceful.

Among the cases that have attracted significant attention, she sat on a three-judge panel of the appeals court that decided in December to reject former President Donald J. Trump’s assertion of executive privilege over the release of White House records concerning the Jan. 6 attack on the Capitol to a House committee. On the district court, too, Judge Jackson ruled against Mr. Trump and his allies on several occasions.

Judge Ketanji Brown Jackson knows her way around Senate confirmation hearings. She has successfully navigated three of them, the most recent one less than a year ago. When members of the Senate Judiciary Committee question her this week, they will be facing a seasoned pro.

Based on her smooth performance in April in connection with her nomination to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, Judge Jackson has mastered the playbook. She knows how to be cordial and noncommittal, to demonstrate mastery of legal materials while avoiding expressing even a hint of an opinion about them.

She has also demonstrated a nimble ability to reframe questions. Last year, for instance, Senator Ted Cruz, Republican of Texas, invited her to take sides in the debate over whether the meaning of the Constitution was fixed when it was adopted and ratified.

“Do you believe we have a living Constitution?” he asked.

“I believe,” she responded, “that the Constitution is an enduring document.”

She was also gracious and capable at hearings on her nominations to the U.S. Sentencing Commission in 2009 and to the Federal District Court in Washington in 2012. She was confirmed to the first two positions by voice vote and to the appeals court by a vote of 53 to 44, with three Republicans supporting her nomination.

In her previous hearings, she has followed the playbook established by her predecessors: not giving answers to questions seen as too specific, saying that could forecast a possible ruling. And she likewise declined to answer questions that were too general, saying that judges should not opine on hypothetical abstractions.

Asked about proposals to expand the size of the Supreme Court, she said, “I don’t think it’s appropriate for me to comment on the structure or the size of the court any more than it would be for me to comment on the court’s rulings.”

About the scope of presidential power: “I’m unfortunately not going to be able to engage in a hypothetical discussion.”

The president’s Supreme Court nominee, Judge Ketanji Brown Jackson, is a target of a Republican effort to vilify and discredit Biden administration judicial nominees who have served as public defenders, by suggesting that they acted inappropriately in representing clients accused of serious crimes.

Judge Jackson, a former public defender, has been sharply questioned by Republicans for her work representing detainees at the U.S. military prison at Guantánamo Bay. In a background paper on her nomination for the high court, the Republican National Committee referred to Judge Jackson’s “advocacy for these terrorists” as “going beyond just giving them a competent defense.”

On Tuesday, Senator Mitch McConnell, the Kentucky Republican and minority leader, said in a floor speech that Judge Jackson had strong backing from progressive groups partially because of her history as a public defender, saying “the soft-on-crime brigade is squarely in Judge Jackson’s corner.”

Democrats say the tactic ignores a fundamental principle of the American justice system — that everyone has the constitutional right to be represented by counsel — and in effect seeks to disqualify from the bench anyone who has taken that obligation seriously when it comes to the accused.

The Republican strategy is a response to a concerted push by the Biden administration to diversify the federal bench. The president, who himself served briefly as a public defender early in his legal career, is actively seeking to name more jurists who have experience in criminal defense work, as well as more people of color.

It is a sea change in the world of judicial nominations, where presidents of both political parties have long shied away from defense attorneys for fear of such political attacks, instead selecting tough-on-crime prosecutors. The type of high-profile murder cases handled by some of Mr. Biden’s nominees would have been considered disqualifying only a few years ago.

The nomination of Judge Jackson, who would be the first public defender and the first Black woman to sit on the high court, will be the biggest test yet of whether a lawyer who represented accused criminals can draw broad Republican support. Her defense work and membership on a commission that reviewed sentencing guidelines will no doubt draw scrutiny during the upcoming hearing.

In almost every other way, Judge Ketanji Brown Jackson fits into the conventional mold of so many Supreme Court justices nominated before her — a widely admired, Harvard-educated overachiever with a respected record as a federal judge.

But she is going where no Black woman has ever gone in American history — a carefully tread path, sometimes through dangerous or inhospitable territory, that has led her to these Supreme Court confirmation before the Senate Judiciary Committee.

When a Confederate flag was hung from the window of a dormitory at Harvard University more than 30 years ago, members of the Black Students Association saw it as an attempt to tell them they did not belong there.

They sprang into action, “being vocal, agitating, militating, marching, doing all that great stuff,” Antoinette Coakley, one of the students, recalled recently. But the voice of another member — Ketanji Brown, a classmate who was soon to become one of Ms. Coakley’s best friends — cut through the noise.

“Ketanji said: ‘Wait a minute, as we’re doing this, we’re missing out on classes. As we’re fighting against this injustice, we’re actually doing them a service because we’re going to be failing,’” Ms. Coakley, now a law professor at Northeastern University, recalled.

“So we protested, but we made sure we were in class,” she added. “We were going to show them that by showing up the way that we did — excellently — that they were wrong.”

Ms. Coakley and other longtime friends from Harvard said the reaction of their classmate, now Judge Ketanji Brown Jackson, was emblematic of how she navigated one of the most elite and white institutions in the country — after being discouraged from even applying. In the end, her experience at Harvard illustrates how Judge Jackson, 51, has long recognized how America’s conflicting views of race and justice shape the world around her. She has embraced her identity while refusing to let affronts to it distract her.

Modern confirmation hearings for Supreme Court nominees have become divisive and intensely political affairs, often held as senators face immense public pressure to stand with or against the nominees.

It hasn’t always been this way.

For much of the United States’ history, senators vetted nominees in private with little fanfare, and nominees all but avoided public scrutiny of their backgrounds or judicial philosophies.

But a number of trends in American politics, including growing enfranchisement and ballooning political polarization, have turned the hearings into the spectacles they are often known as today.

With senators more primed to appeal to their political bases, and interest groups lobbying to shape the ideological balance of the court, hearings have frequently devolved into partisan showdowns.

As Judge Ketanji Brown Jackson appears before lawmakers on Monday, her confirmation hearings may be no different.