Between network, cable and streaming, the modern television landscape is a vast one. Here are some of the shows, specials and movies coming to TV this week, March 21-27. Details and times are subject to change.

THE VOW (2012) 6:15 p.m. on Showtime. Channing Tatum returns to theaters this week in “The Lost City,” a big-budget comedy with Sandra Bullock and Daniel Radcliffe. It’s Tatum’s second big movie of the year, after “Dog” in February. Tatum was booked solid in 2012, too: He starred in two Steven Soderbergh movies (“Haywire” and “Magic Mike”), a remake of “21 Jump Street” and “The Vow,” a romantic drama with Rachel McAdams about a marriage derailed by amnesia. In his review for The New York Times, A.O. Scott wrote that the movie itself was a lackluster adaptation of the true story on which it was based, but that the chemistry between Tatum and McAdams stood out. “When they are on the screen together here,” Scott wrote, “there is enough physical charm and emotional warmth to distract from the threadbare setting and the paper-thin plot.”

AMERICAN SONG CONTEST 8 p.m. on NBC. The Eurovision Song Contest, a television spectacle, has been held annually overseas since before the British Invasion. “American Song Contest” finally brings a version of it stateside. This musical competition, with Snoop Dogg and Kelly Clarkson as hosts, gathers dozens of performers from all 50 states and has them perform original songs. There are no limitations on genre, which should making for interesting juxtapositions.

THE 2022 IHEARTRADIO MUSIC AWARDS 8 p.m. on Fox. LL Cool J will host this year’s edition of the iHeartRadio Music Awards, which will be broadcast live from the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles on Tuesday. The lineup of performers includes Jennifer Lopez, Megan Thee Stallion, Jason Aldean and John Legend. Competing for the top prize, song of the year, will be Olivia Rodrigo, Adele, Ed Sheeran, Doja Cat, Silk Sonic, Dua Lipa, Lil Nas X, Justin Bieber, Ariana Grande and the Kid Laroi.

SHACKLETON’S ENDURANCE: THE LOST ICE SHIP FOUND 10 p.m. on History. Frigid water and a merciful lack of wood-eating marine organisms helped the explorer Ernest Shackleton’s ship stay recognizable in the century that passed between when it sank, in 1915, and when its wreckage was discovered earlier this month at the bottom of the Weddell Sea, east of the Antarctic Peninsula. The discovery involved a multimillion-dollar hunt and the use of undersea drones. This new special will look at the significance of the find.

BLACKKKLANSMAN (2018) 5:20 p.m. on FXM. John David Washington and Adam Driver play a pair of police detectives who infiltrate the Ku Klux Klan during the 1970s in this Spike Lee joint. They’re a somewhat odd couple for that particular job. Washington’s character, Ron Stallworth, is the first African American officer hired by the Colorado Springs Police Department; Driver’s character is a Jewish officer named Flip Zimmerman. (Stallworth is a real person — the movie is based on his memoir of a similar name.) When the movie came out in 2018, A.O. Scott called it Lee’s “best nondocumentary feature in more than a decade and one of his greatest.”

ATLANTA 10 p.m. on FX. What will “Atlanta” look like outside Atlanta? The third season of Donald Glover’s surreal comedy series is set mostly outside Georgia. Outside the United States, actually: Alfred, the fictional rapper known as Paper Boi (played by Brian Tyree Henry), goes on a European tour, bringing along Earn (his cousin and manager, played by Glover), Darius (their enigmatic friend played by Lakeith Stanfield) and Van (Earn’s it’s-complicated girlfriend, played by Zazie Beetz. The location change should make for a surprising set of episodes — not that the show has been lacking in stylistic twists. Wesley Morris, in a Times column in 2018, summed up the second season by saying, “No episode looked or felt the same as the one before it.”

GREAT PERFORMANCES: THE CONDUCTOR (2022) 9 p.m. on PBS (check local listings). Marin Alsop became the first woman to lead a major orchestra in the United States when she took over the Baltimore Symphony Orchestra in 2007. This documentary, directed by Bernadette Wegenstein, looks at Alsop’s career through the conductor’s own recollections and interviews with musicians who have either been pupils of Alsop’s or who have otherwise been affected by her work. While Alsop’s story is exceptional, the documentary itself takes a “fairly standard approach,” Ben Kenigsberg said in his review for The Times. “The most engaging portions,” he wrote, “involve music-making itself.”

THE GODFATHER (1972) 6 p.m. on Paramount Network. Since its release in theaters 50 years ago this month, the original “Godfather” has been shown on TV more times than they shot Sonny on the causeway. Here’s a chance to rewatch it for its anniversary alongside its equally acclaimed sequel, THE GODFATHER PART II (1974), which airs on Paramount Network at 10 p.m. Watch them together to see Francis Ford Coppola’s growth as a director. “You have to understand, as a filmmaker, I didn’t really know how to make ‘The Godfather,’” Coppola said in a recent interview with The Times. “I learned how to make ‘The Godfather’ making it.”

THE 94TH ANNUAL ACADEMY AWARDS 8 p.m. on ABC. You can count on seeing a handful of unpredictable things at any given Oscars ceremony. This year, we know when one of them will come: at the moment the best actress winner is announced. The race for that honor is unusually open this year, with no obvious favorite among the nominees: Jessica Chastain, Olivia Colman, Penélope Cruz, Nicole Kidman and Kristen Stewart. (As The Times’s awards-season columnist, Kyle Buchanan, recently wrote, nearly every ceremony this season has offered a different lineup of women.) The race for the top honor, best picture, is down to “Belfast,” “CODA,” “Don’t Look Up,” “Drive My Car,” “Dune,” “King Richard,” “Licorice Pizza,” “Nightmare Alley,” “The Power of the Dog” and “West Side Story.” Wanda Sykes, Regina Hall and Amy Schumer are the hosts.