Ukraine refused to surrender the port city of Mariupol after Russian forces gave a predawn deadline. A shopping center was reduced to ruins by one of the heaviest strikes to hit the center of the capital.

Follow the latest updates on Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.

KYIV, Ukraine — Ukraine rejected Russia’s demand that soldiers defending the embattled southern port of Mariupol surrender at dawn on Monday, even as a powerful blast rocked the capital Kyiv and reduced a sprawling shopping mall to rubble.

After nearly a month of fighting, the war has reached a stalemate, with Russia turning to deadlier and blunter methods, including targeting civilians. A New York Times reporter saw six dead bodies at the mall in Kyiv covered in plastic as rescue workers battled fires and pulled more victims from the wreckage on Monday morning.

President Volodymyr Zelensky, addressing the nation overnight between Sunday and Monday, said that a relief convoy in northeastern Ukraine near the city of Kharkiv had been hijacked by Russian forces. And efforts to reach hundreds of thousands of people trapped in Mariupol remained fraught with danger.

“The enemy desperately does not want civilians to break through,’’ Olena Zelenska, the president’s wife, said in a statement. “But they will. Please hold on, dear people, I beg you. I will repeat my husband’s words, ‘Ukraine doesn’t abandon her people.’”

Ukrainian forces were making progress in pushing the Russians out from parts of the southern city of Kherson. Russian forces were said to be leaving a trail of destruction in their wake. In places where Russia does have control, Ukrainian officials and witnesses said they were not only forcibly deporting people, but conscripting men to fight in their war effort.

In other major developments:

President Joseph R. Biden is making his biggest diplomatic push of the war. On Monday, he will speak to his counterparts from France, Germany, Italy and Britain. He will travel to Brussels on Wednesday to meet with NATO and European leaders, then head to Poland on Friday.

The United States has said it opposes Poland’s proposal for a NATO peacekeeping mission.

The deputy commander of Russia’s Black Sea fleet, Andrei Paliy, died in combat in Mariupol, according to the governor of Sevastopol, the Crimean city where the fleet is based. Paliy is one of several high-ranking Russian officers who have been killed in action in Ukraine.

President Zelensky called for renewed peace talks with Russia, despite few signs of progress after four days of negotiations last week.



KYIV, Ukraine — A Russian missile strike reduced a sprawling shopping mall in Kyiv to a smoldering ruin, one of the most powerful strikes to rock the center of the Ukrainian capital since the war began last month.

City officials said at least eight people were killed, though the toll was likely to rise from the explosion around midnight at the shopping mall, Retroville, in northern Kyiv. It was so powerful that it blew debris hundreds of yards in every direction, shook buildings and flattened one part of the mall. It turned the parking lot into a sea of flames.

On Monday, roughly eight hours after the strike, firefighters were still battling pockets of flames while soldiers and emergency crews searched the rubble for any survivors or casualties. By 8 a.m. local time, the rescuers had pulled out six bodies and covered them with plastic, and they held out little hope for finding survivors. A soldier at the scene said body parts littered the wreckage.

In the mall itself, burst pipes sent water cascading through a mess of tangled metal and concrete. An office building next door was still standing, but all of its windows were blown out and a fire was burning inside at dawn.

There was no visible evidence of any military vehicles or hardware at the devastated site. All of Kyiv, however, is involved in the defense of the capital, a once-thriving metropolis turned into a fortress.

While Kyiv has been under bombardment for weeks, the scope of the devastation around the mall was greater than anything The New York Times has witnessed inside the city limits.

Ukrainian armed forces have waged ferocious battles in the cities around Kyiv and have managed to push Russian forces back in places. The British defense intelligence agency said on Monday that the bulk of those forces were more than 15 miles from the center and that taking Kyiv remained “Russia’s primary military objective.”

With the city seemingly out of artillery range, Russia has turned to rockets and bombs, often targeting civilian infrastructure and neighborhoods.

The Retroville mall hosted a multiplex movie theater, a fitness club and fast food restaurants like McDonald’s and KFC as well as a whole gallery dedicated to sporting goods, among other stores.

On the first day of the war in Ukraine, its managers announced a temporary closure on Facebook and offered information on the nearest shelters.

“We believe in our army and peaceful sky,” they said in the post. To date, it was their last.

LVIV, Ukraine — On the night before the Russian invasion of Ukraine, a musician was singing on a cobblestone street in the heart of Lviv’s old town, the glow from heat lamps casting a soft light on a yellow stone house.

Until the war, it was the home of Wild House, part exhibition space, part barbershop, part TikTok studio, and a gathering spot for artists and digital nomads. Now, it is a boardinghouse for people fleeing Russia’s assault.

It started informally, with word of its existence spreading in rushed phone calls and frenzied text messages. As the war expanded, so did word of Wild House, now part of an elaborate volunteer network dealing with a never ending stream of need.

Nadiya Opryshko, 29, an aspiring journalist turned humanitarian, is the driving force behind its transformation.

“The military of Russia, they are fighting for nothing,” she said in an interview. “They did not know and cannot understand what they are fighting for.

“Ukrainian people, we know what we are fighting for,” she continued. “We are fighting for peace. We are fighting for our country. And we are fighting for freedom.”

Her story, and that of Wild House, in many ways mirror the broader transformation that her city and her nation have undergone in only a few weeks of war.

The signs of change are visible everywhere, at once strange but also oddly familiar, former rituals playing out in a radically altered context.

A family stands on a corner with their suitcases near a French cafe, as the voice of Edith Piaf wafts in the background. But they are not tourists. In their suitcases are lifetimes condensed, whatever time and space would allow as they ran.

Two people share coffee at Black Honey. Not old friends, but a soldier of fortune and an Australian journalist. The hotels are all full, but the travelers are not tourists drawn to the city’s magnificent architecture, but relief workers, diplomats, journalists, spies and an assortment of other people whose pursuits are harder to divine.

And, always, there are the air raid sirens, wailing reminders of the destruction raining on cities across the country that, with the horrific strike last week on a military base just outside of town and another attack on Friday near the airport, are drawing ever closer to the city itself.

But every day that Ukrainian forces around the capital, Kyiv, and other cities fight off the Russian onslaught is another day for Lviv to harden its defenses. Artwork is now stowed in bunkers. Four limestone statues in Rynok Square, meant as an allegory for the Earth, are now wrapped in foam and plastic, turning Neptune into a silhouette with only his trident identifiable. The stained-glass windows of the Basilica of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary, founded in 1360, are covered in metal to protect them from Russian rockets.

The majority of the three million people who have fled Ukraine have passed through Lviv’s train and bus stations. And for millions more internally displaced people, Lviv is the gateway to safety, however fleeting, in the west. The city is overstuffed with people and emotion. Energy and despair. Anger and determination.

The morning after the first air raid siren sounded before dawn on Feb. 24, however, there was mostly uncertainty. People emerged bleary eyed and unsure, lining up at bank machines and stores, rushing to collect valuables and making plans to wait out the storm.

Most of the shops closed, taxis stopped working and seemingly everyone went on Telegram to watch videos — some real, some fake — of Russian fighter jets roaring over cities and Russian missiles crashing into buildings.

The hotels emptied as people rushed to join loved ones in Ukraine and outside the country.

“They are afraid for their families, afraid for their friends,” Denys Derchachev, 36, a doorman at the Citadel Inn, said on the first morning of the war.

Christina Kornienko was in line to collect her valuables from a safe deposit box. But even in the shock of the moment, she had an idea of what would happen next. “The women will go to Poland and the men will fight,” she said.

She was right. Shock quickly turned to anger, which fueled a remarkable sense of solidarity.

Less than a month ago, Arsan, 35, was the owner of a local coffee shop. He was about to go to the gym when his wife told him the country was at war. Four days later, he was learning how to make firebombs and spot the fluorescent markers placed by Russian saboteurs on buildings to direct missile strikes.

“We can learn to shoot because we don’t know how this situation will develop,” he said. He said he was scared of what “crazy people may do,” particularly President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, with his talk about nuclear weapons, but Arsan was confident in the army.

“The Ukrainian army is doing a great job,” he said. “They are super people.”

A month ago, Arsan’s confidence could easily have been dismissed as bravado. Few military analysts gave the Ukrainian army much of a chance against what was assumed to be the Russian army’s superior firepower and professionalism. But with each passing day — as Ukrainian forces defend Kyiv, hang on with grim determination in Mariupol and mount a spirited campaign to keep Russian forces from advancing on Odessa — the nation’s belief in itself appears to deepen.

Periodically, the Ukrainian military makes expansive claims, impossible to verify, about its achievements on the battlefield. This month, for example, it said that since the start of the war, its forces had killed 13,500 Russian soldiers and destroyed 404 tanks, 81 planes, 95 helicopters and more than 1,200 armored personnel carriers.

These numbers, that Western analysts say are almost certainly inflated, are cited by President Volodymyr Zelensky in his daily talks to the nation — once, twice, sometimes three or four times a day, as he channels the nation’s anger and tries to lift its spirits.

It is a routine he has managed to keep up for weeks, often bringing Ukrainians to tears while inspiring a resistance born of baristas, computer programmers, accountants and lawyers.

But an army, as Napoleon once said, moves on its stomach, even a civilian one. And the effort to supply the nation’s ever growing cadre of citizen-warriors, like so many aspects of the nation’s defense, started with volunteers.

Hundreds of them assemble daily at the Lviv Palace of Arts, fighting the war by packing jars of pickled preserves, mountains of donated clothes, gallons of water and trash bags stuffed with toiletries.

“We began immediately after the bombardment started,” said Yuri Viznyak, the artistic director of the center, who now finds himself leading a critical hub in the war effort. And with Russians increasingly targeting civilians, much of his work is now devoted to getting relief to people in dire need.

But as soldiers, weapons and humanitarian aid move from Lviv to the eastern front, a tide of humanity continues to move in the other direction. With each day, the stories they carry to Lviv grow more dire.

Matukhno Vitaliy, 23, is from the Luhansk region in eastern Ukraine and the city of Lysychansk, near the Russian border. It took him two days and nights to reach Lviv in a crowded evacuation train.

He said his parents were still in the city, with no running water because all the pipes had been destroyed. It had 100,000 inhabitants before the war, but there is no telling how many have fled and how many have died.

“Everything is destroyed,” he said.

Mariupol. Kharkiv. Chernihiv. Sumy. Okhtyrka. Hostomel. Irpin. The list of Ukrainian cities turned to ruins keeps growing. While the Russian advance may have slowed, the destruction has not.

Any illusions people in Lviv might have had that their city might be spared have long faded. So grandmothers join grandchildren stringing fabric together to make camouflage nets. Villagers on the outskirts of the city dig trenches and erect barricades. Movie streaming sites feature videos on how to make firebombs.

Yet, in contrast to the first days of the war, the city is humming with life. Stores have reopened and street musicians are performing. Alcohol is banned, but bars are full. A 7 p.m. curfew means finding a table for the compressed dinner hours is a challenge.

But the posters around town that once advertised local businesses have been replaced by war propaganda. Many take aim at Mr. Putin, focusing on a crude remark he made about Mr. Zelensky.

“Like it or not, beauty, you have to put up with it,” Mr. Putin said, using an expression that rhymes in Russian. Ukrainians believe he was making a reference to rape — a prelude to what they say is the rape of a nation.

One of the most popular posters features a woman looming over Mr. Putin. Jabbing a gun into his mouth, she says, “I am not your beauty.”

KRAKOW, Poland — President Volodymyr Zelensky, in an overnight address to Ukrainians, said that the Russian bombing of an art school in the besieged coastal city of Mariupol on Sunday may have left up to 400 people trapped.

“There were no military positions,” he said, adding that the 400 people sheltering there from relentless shelling in the city were mostly women, children or seniors. “They are under the debris. We do not know how many are alive at the moment.”

The strike had echoes of an attack in the same city last week on a theater where hundreds of people were sheltering, with the word “children” written in huge letters on the ground outside as a warning against airstrikes. It was reduced to rubble.

More than 7,000 people were evacuated through humanitarian corridors on Sunday, Mr. Zelensky said, though only four of the humanitarian corridors set up to allow for escape had remained open. 

On Monday, more buses will be sent to Mariupol to continue evacuations. But elsewhere in the country, he said, Russian forces had targeted humanitarian efforts intended to spare civilians from the worst effects of their sieges.

He accused Russian troops of capturing a convoy delivering humanitarian supplies to the town of Vovchansk, which is on a route from Russia into Kharkiv, a major city where Russian forces have laid siege since the start of the war, destroying civilian infrastructure.

“There is no connection now with six people, five drivers and one doctor,” Mr. Zelensky said of the convoy. “We will release them. We will try again and again to deliver to our people what they need.”

Mr. Zelensky applauded resistance in Kherson, a Black Sea port that is the most important city so far claimed by Russian forces, saying he was grateful to the military and ordinary civilians there for keeping Russia from taking full control.

In a message directed at the Russian side, he said the Russian military was struggling to get home, adding, “That is why our soldiers help them with the path to God’s judgment.”

What they would find in hell, he said, would be much like the besieged cities of Ukraine: “I am sure they receive only one punishment, one for all: the eternal cellar. Forever under the bombs. Forever without food, water and heat. For everything they did to our people, ordinary Ukrainians.”

Two missiles struck a military training ground in the area of Rivne, in northwestern Ukraine, the governor of the region said in a video message early on Monday. It was unclear what had been damaged and if there were any casualties.

A powerful missile struck a shopping mall in northern Kyiv, reducing what was until recently a buzzing hive of commerce into a scene of utter devastation. By 8 a.m. Monday, six dead bodies had been pulled from the rubble. A soldier at the scene, who described body parts littering the wreckage, said there may be more than two dozen more in the rubble.

President Biden will travel to Europe for talks with some of America’s closest allies this week, in his most direct effort yet to rally opposition to the Russian invasion of Ukraine.

His week of diplomacy will begin Monday, in a call with the leaders of Britain, France, Germany and Italy. He will then travel on Wednesday to Brussels, where NATO will hold an emergency meeting on a response to the war.

One of the most potentially divisive issues at the NATO meeting will be a proposal from Poland to organize an international peacekeeping mission for Ukraine. While NATO has carried out such missions in Europe before, those were done after fighting eased.

While the United States provides weapons to Ukraine, Mr. Biden has resisted calls to support a no-fly zone over the country, fearing it could draw the United States closer to a direct confrontation with Russia. NATO and American officials have also said there are no plans to send troops to Ukraine.

Later Thursday, Mr. Biden will join a European Council summit and a G7 meeting called by Germany to discuss imposing more sanctions against President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia. They will also discuss how to help the more than three million people who have fled Ukraine.

On Friday, he will visit Poland, a NATO member that borders Ukraine and is the main destination for refugees. He is scheduled to discuss the humanitarian crisis caused by the war with President Andrzej Duda of Poland. Jen Psaki, the White House press secretary, said there are no plans for Mr. Biden to travel to Ukraine during the trip.

“The trip will be focused on continuing to rally the world in support of the Ukrainian people and against President Putin’s invasion of Ukraine,” she wrote on Twitter.

Mr. Biden’s travels follow repeated talks between Russia and Ukraine, including a meeting between foreign ministers of the two countries in Turkey earlier this month. While those negotiations have made no clear progress, Mevlut Cavusoglu, Turkey’s foreign minister, said Sunday that the two sides were close to an agreement, and he was hopeful about the chances of a cease-fire.

American officials have questioned whether Russia has been a sincere participant in the talks and downplayed the possibility of a deal.

“The negotiations seem to be one-sided, and the Russians have not leaned into any possibility for a negotiated and diplomatic solution,” Linda Thomas-Greenfield, the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, told CNN on Sunday.

Russian shelling in Sumy damaged an ammonia tank, causing some leakage but posing no risk to nearby residents, the State Emergency Service of Ukraine said Monday. One person, a chemical plant employee, was injured.

Russian shelling of a chemical plant in the Sumy region east of Kyiv caused an ammonia gas leak early Monday, the regional leader said. Dmytro Zhyvytskyi, the governor of Sumy, said residents of the town of Novoselytsya were at risk. Ammonia can cause burning of the eyes and respiratory tract and is potentially lethal in high concentrations.

Ukraine rejected a demand to surrender the city of Mariupol by 5 a.m. Monday, as Russian forces broadened their bombardment of the strategic port and forcibly deported thousands of residents, according to city officials and witnesses.

Iryna Vereschuk, a deputy prime minister of Ukraine, told Ukrainska Pravda that her country rejected the Russian demand for surrender. She called on Russia to open a humanitarian corridor in Mariupol so thousands of civilians trapped with little food or water can escape.

Military experts now describe the war as a bloody stalemate, with Russian troops appearing to lose ground around Kyiv, the Ukrainian capital, while making some gains in the east.

Russia is increasingly turning to long-range missiles and targeting civilians as Ukraine stifles its ground campaign, despite Russia’s superior manpower and weaponry. Mariupol has become a grim symbol of Russian brutality and frustration.

The situation there deteriorated even more over the weekend, with reports of Russian forces successfully conquering three neighborhoods and Russian naval vessels shelling the city.

Among the latest targets in Mariupol was an art school, where about 400 residents were hiding, according to city officials who claimed it had been bombed by Russian forces targeting civilians. The number of casualties was not known.

The week ahead was shaping up to be a busy one for members of the reinvigorated NATO alliance, which is holding an emergency summit in Brussels on Thursday. Poland said it would propose a peacekeeping mission in Ukraine at the meeting, an idea that is at odds with the alliance’s official stance and one the United States rejected on Sunday.

In other major developments:

President Biden, before leaving on a trip to Europe, plans to hold a call on Monday with the leaders of France, Germany, Italy and Britain. He will head to Brussels on Thursday and then to Warsaw to meet with Poland’s president on Friday.

Ukrainian officials said that an attack by a Russian tank on a home for seniors in eastern Ukraine’s Luhansk region had killed 56 people on March 11. The incident was belatedly reported, the authorities said, because fighting had made access impossible.

The deputy commander of Russia’s Black Sea fleet, Andrei Paliy, died in combat in Mariupol, according to the governor of Sevastopol, the Crimean city where the fleet is based. Paliy is one of several high-ranking Russian officers who have been killed in action in Ukraine.

President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine called for renewed peace talks with Russia, despite few signs of progress after four days of negotiations last week.

The diplomatic push will start even before President Biden leaves for Brussels. He is scheduled to hold a call on Monday with his most important European allies: the leaders of France, Germany, Italy and Britain.

President Biden will travel to Warsaw to meet with Poland’s president on Friday, capping a week where he will be in Brussels to discuss Ukraine with leaders from the G7, NATO and the E.U.

Prime Minister Janez Jansa of Slovenia said his country would send some diplomats back to Kyiv, one month after evacuating its embassy. The diplomats volunteered to return because Ukraine “needs direct diplomatic support,” Mr. Jansa, who visited Kyiv last week, wrote on Twitter.

Poland will formally propose a plan to organize an international peacekeeping mission in Ukraine at an emergency NATO summit in Brussels on Thursday, an idea that is at odds with the alliance’s official stance and one the United States rejected on Sunday.

Poland’s deputy prime minister, Jaroslaw Kaczynski, first proposed the idea when the leaders of Poland, the Czech Republic and Slovenia traveled to Kyiv last week to meet with Ukraine’s leaders.

“I think that it is necessary to have a peace mission — NATO, possibly some wider international structure — but a mission that will be able to defend itself, which will operate on Ukrainian territory,” Mr. Kaczynski said at a news conference in Kyiv.

So far, NATO has maintained that it will not send troops to Ukraine in fear that it may escalate tensions and be interpreted as an act of war against Russia.

“I can’t preview what decisions will be made at this NATO conference and how NATO will respond to the Polish proposal. What I can say is American troops will not be on the ground in Ukraine at this moment,” the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, told CNN on Sunday.

During a news conference on Thursday, Piotr Müller, a Polish government spokesman, made it clear that Poland is not advocating “getting into direct conflict with Russia.” The proposed peacekeeping mission would only be stationed in the parts of Ukraine which are not occupied by Russia, “to send a clear signal that war crimes will not be accepted” Mr. Müller explained.

Jens Stoltenberg, NATO’s secretary general, said during a news conference on Wednesday that while the alliance “supports peace efforts” and “calls on Russia and President Putin to withdraw its forces,” it has “no plans of deploying NATO troops on the ground in Ukraine.”

NATO has deployed peacekeeping missions to conflict-stricken countries in the past, such as Kosovo and Bosnia and Herzegovina, where the role of the troops was to ensure public safety and support international humanitarian efforts. However, these missions were usually launched after the end of military conflicts, and not while they were still in place.

Ukraine has rejected a Russian demand to surrender the besieged city of Mariupol by 5 a.m. Monday, Iryna Vereschuk, a deputy prime minister of Ukraine, told the Ukrainska Pravda online newspaper. She called on the Russians to open a humanitarian corridor so thousands of civilians trapped with little food or water can escape.

A survivor being pulled from the rubble a day after a missile strike killed at least 40 marines.

A kindergarten basement doing duty as a shelter for refugees driven away by the fighting.

An economics student working on his laptop in the bunker where he had been living since the start of the war.

And a brief moment of joy at a base where two Ukrainian soldiers were married by their battalion commander.

In Ukraine, the unimaginable has become the unforgettable. For the past four weeks since Russia invaded, photographers with The New York Times and other news organizations throughout the country have worked to chronicle the ordeal.

The deputy commander of Russia’s Black Sea fleet, Andrei Paliy, died in combat in Ukraine, according to the governor of Sevastopol, the Crimean city where the fleet is based. Paliy died during fighting in the city of Mariupol, Leonid Razvozhayev said. Paliy is one of several high-ranking Russian officers who have been killed in action in Ukraine.

Qin Gang, the Chinese ambassador to the United States, said on Sunday that China would not send weapons and ammunition to support Russia’s war in Ukraine and that Beijing would “do everything to de-escalate the crisis.”

Mr. Qin’s comments, which were aimed at an American audience, presented a softer tone than the one officials in Beijing have used when discussing the war, particularly in domestic settings.

The remarks came as higher-ranking Chinese officials continued to accuse the United States and Europe of instigating the conflict, and continued to amplify Russian disinformation that served as a rationale for the invasion. They also followed President Biden’s warning on Friday to President Xi Jinping that China would face “consequences” if Beijing gave material aid to Russia to support its war.

China’s rhetorical strategy — speaking of peace and de-escalation to an international audience while continuing to support Russia domestically — demonstrates the careful moves Beijing has made in staking out its position on Ukraine.

But the United States has voiced skepticism of that approach. Secretary of State Antony J. Blinken criticized Beijing in a news conference on Thursday for refusing to condemn Russia’s invasion of Ukraine “while seeking to portray itself as a neutral arbiter” in the crisis.

“We believe China in particular has a responsibility,” Mr. Blinken said, “to use its influence with President Putin and to defend the international rules and principles that it professes to support.”

Instead, he added, “it appears that China is moving in the opposite direction.”

Some of Mr. Qin’s remarks aligned with the language of more senior officials. He rejected as “naïve” the idea of China publicly condemning Russia’s invasion, insisting that Beijing’s efforts to pull Moscow back from the conflict would be more effective from a position of neutrality.

“China’s trusted relations with Russia is not a liability,” Mr. Qin said on CBS’s “Face the Nation,” adding that Mr. Xi had at some point told President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia to back down from the conflict.

But domestically, Chinese officials have continued to echo Russia and accuse NATO of provoking the war while criticizing sanctions levied against Moscow in retaliation for the invasion.

“What lies at the heart is the issue of European security, and NATO’s move of expanding eastward without limit merits reflection,” Wang Yi, China’s foreign minister, said on Sunday during a joint news conference with Algeria’s foreign minister.

Mr. Wang also equated Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, which has killed thousands and displaced millions, with the sanctions against Russia.

“It is widely believed that when addressing regional and international hot-spot issues,” Mr. Wang said, “war and sanctions are not the only options, and dialogue and negotiation is the fundamental way out.”

Le Yucheng, the vice foreign minister, a day earlier also criticized the sanctions, saying that “globalization is used as a weapon” against Russia and that “the overseas assets of Russian citizens are seized groundlessly.”

He also falsely said that NATO had broken a pledge not to expand into Eastern Europe at the end of the Cold War. In fact, while that offer had been made during negotiations with the Soviet Union, no such provision was included in the final treaty unifying Germany signed by American, European and Russian officials.

LVIV, Ukraine — Firing rockets and bombs from the land, air and — probably for the first time — from warships in the Sea of Azov, Russian forces broadened their bombardment of the besieged Ukrainian city of Mariupol on Sunday and have forcibly deported thousands of residents, according to city officials and witnesses.

Among the freshly devastated was an art school, where about 400 residents were hiding, according to city officials who claimed it had been bombed by Russian forces targeting civilians. The number of casualties was not known.

Into the fourth week of the Russian assault on the country, the coastal city — a strategic port that would give Russia control over much of Ukraine’s southern coast — has increasingly become a grim symbol of Russian frustration that its superior manpower and weaponry have not forced the quick capitulation of the country. And it has come to symbolize Russia’s brutality, with its forces increasingly targeting civilian sites with long-range missiles to crush the public’s spirit and break the Ukrainian military resistance.

The city has been without food, water, electricity or gas since the early days after the Feb. 24 invasion. But its situation deteriorated even more over the weekend, with reports of raging street battles and Russian forces successfully conquering three neighborhoods. On Sunday morning, the Azov battalion, a Ukrainian regiment that has drawn far-right fighters from around the world and is charged with the city’s defense, said four Russian naval vessels had shelled the city. Largely cut off from the outside world, the toll on civilians there is difficult to assess.

Last week, a Mariupol theater sheltering hundreds of people was reduced to rubble. The word “children” was written in huge letters on the pavement, clearly visible from the air. Even now, the fates of most of those people remain unknown.

“The besieged Mariupol will go down in the history of responsibility for war crimes,” President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine said in a speech to the nation late Saturday night.

“The terror the occupiers perpetrated on this peaceful city will be remembered for centuries to come.”

In a video address on Sunday to Israeli lawmakers, Mr. Zelensky seemingly compared the suffering of his people to those of the Jews during the Holocaust — an analogy some Israeli lawmakers criticized as going too far.

“Our people are now wandering in the world, seeking security,” the Ukrainian president said in the address, broadcast to crowds in a public square in Tel Aviv, “as you once did.”

Mr. Zelensky is Jewish, but has been called a “little Nazi” by President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, who has falsely claimed that Ukraine’s government is pro-Nazi. He has made the “de-Nazification” of Ukraine a justification for the invasion.

Israel has attempted to act as a mediator between Ukraine and Russia, offering aid to the besieged country and accepting refugees, but refusing to provide weapons like its vaunted Iron Dome missile defense system or even defensive equipment, like helmets, to Ukraine. Israel’s stance has angered Mr. Zelensky.

“It is possible to mediate between countries,” Mr. Zelensky said in his 10-minute address, “but not between good and evil.”

Ukrainian officials said on Sunday that an attack by a Russian tank on a home for the elderly in a town called Kreminna in eastern Ukraine’s Luhansk region had killed 56 people on March 11. The incident was belatedly reported, the authorities said, because fighting had made access impossible.

“They just adjusted the tank, put it in front of the house and started firing,” said Serhiy Haidai, a Ukrainian official overseeing the Luhansk Regional State Administration.

Despite four days of negotiations last week between Ukraine and Russia, there was little indication of progress toward peace. Still, Mr. Zelensky reiterated his desire to engage diplomatically with the Russians, telling CNN on Sunday that “without negotiations we cannot end this war.”

As Russian forces pushed into the center of Mariupol, some 4,500 residents were forcibly taken across the nearby Russian border, according to Pyotr Andryuschenko, an adviser to Mariupol’s mayor. With no resources in Russia to rely on, they would be at the mercy of people who had taken them across the border, he said.

Recently evacuated Mariupol residents also told The New York Times that they had been in touch with people who had been apprehended in basements and taken across the border against their will.

“What the occupiers are doing today is familiar to the older generation, who saw the horrific events of World War II, when the Nazis forcibly captured people,” said Mariupol’s mayor, Vadym Boychenko.

Officials in Moscow have not directly addressed these claims, but said on Friday that thousands of Ukrainians had “expressed a desire to escape” to Russia.

Elsewhere in Ukraine, Russia said it had used advanced long-range missiles to hit three military facilities, including a training center in the northern town of Ovruch and a large fuel depot near the southern city of Mykolaiv.

Maj. Gen. Igor Konashenkov, the Russian Defense Ministry’s spokesman, said Sunday that Russia had used a Kinzhal hypersonic missile — so fast it can evade interception — to strike the fuel depot. It was the same type of missile that Russia claimed it had used for the first time on Saturday to strike an ammunitions depot in western Ukraine.

Mykhailo Podolyak, a Ukrainian presidential adviser, acknowledged on Sunday that Russia had used Kinzhal hypersonic missiles, but did not specify where or when.

Cruise missiles launched from the Black Sea on Sunday also destroyed a military factory’s workshops in the northern town of Nizhyn, General Konashenkov said.

There was no immediate comment from Ukrainian officials, and the claims could not be independently verified.

The aerial bombardment fit into a picture of a bloody stalemate that Western military experts are now describing, with Russia increasingly turning to long-range missiles as its ground campaign has been stifled by Ukrainian resistance, and as Russian troops appear to be even losing ground around Kyiv, the capital.

The U.S. defense secretary, Lloyd J. Austin III, told CBS’s “Face the Nation” that Russia’s military campaign had “essentially stalled” after sustaining heavy casualties, characterizing Russia’s strategy so far as feeding its soldiers “into a wood chipper.”

“Russian generals are running out of time, ammunition, and manpower,” Ben Hodges, the former commander of the U.S. Army in Europe, wrote last week. 

“The Russians are in trouble, and they know it,” Mr. Hodges wrote. 

Russian commanders initially planned airborne and mechanized operations to quickly seize Kyiv, Kharkiv, Odessa, and other major Ukrainian cities. Their hope was to install leaders loyal to Moscow.

It is now clear that plan has failed, analysts said.

Britain’s defense intelligence agency said on Sunday that Russian forces were still working to encircle cities and continue to hold territory in the south around Kherson. But, it said Russia had increased “indiscriminate shelling of urban areas resulting in widespread destruction and large numbers of civilian casualties.”

This, said Mr. Hodges, had been intentional.

“These strikes confirm that they do have precision capabilities, as we’d assumed,” he said in an email message. “Which also confirms that their use of indiscriminate strikes in cities is not because they don’t have precision munitions. It is deliberate, also as we’d assumed.”

A stalemate is not the same as an armistice or cease-fire. 

Some of the deadliest battles of World War I were fought during stalemates that the antagonists failed to break, at a cost of tens of thousands of lives, pointed out a recent examination of the Ukraine invasion by the Washington-based Institute for the Study of War.

Even as the Russian invaders find military success entering Mariupol, the costs might limit the impact of any Russian victory.

“If and when Mariupol ultimately falls the Russian forces now besieging it may not be strong enough to change the course of the campaign dramatically by attacking to the west,” the institute’s analysis stated, adding that continued bombardment of Ukrainian cities was likely.

 

The Russian invasion has led to the fastest-moving exodus of European refugees since World War II. More than two million Ukrainians have surged into Poland, where the government has worked feverishly to provide support, according to Marek Magierowski, Poland’s ambassador to the United States.

The ambassador told CNN’s “State of the Union” on Sunday that Poland had already integrated tens of thousands of Ukrainian children into its school system, thanks in part to a new law that allows Ukrainians to apply for Polish IDs, business permits, health care and insurance.

The efforts represent a sharp departure by the Polish government, which has resorted to increasingly extreme measures to prevent migrants of color fleeing conflicts in Africa and the Middle East from crossing its border.

But, Polish officials are discussing longer term efforts to relocate the largely white Ukrainians to other European countries, the Polish ambassador said.

“We have done our utmost to accommodate the Ukrainian refugees, to host them in our homes,” Mr. Magierowski said.

“But, of course, two million people. It’s a huge number.”

President Volodymyr Zelensky said Sunday that he would reject any peace agreement requiring that Ukraine recognize the independence of two Russian-backed separatist regions, but suggested that there could be a “model of understanding” to be reached on the territories.

“There are compromises for which we cannot be ready as an independent state,” Mr. Zelensky said through an interpreter during an interview on CNN’s “Fareed Zakaria GPS.” He added: “You cannot just demand from Ukraine to recognize some territories as independent republics. These compromises are simply wrong.”

The Ukrainian president laid out his vision for an agreement to end the war, prevent future conflicts with Russia, and “approach these territories which are temporarily occupied,” referring to the separatist regions.

Mr. Zelensky also said that if Ukraine was unable to join the NATO military alliance, he would seek a more limited coalition of countries — including some NATO members — that could help deter future attacks from Russia.

“If NATO members are ready to see us in the alliance, then do it immediately — because people are dying on a daily basis,” he said. If not, he said, “Ukraine has to seek for other security guarantees from individual countries.”

Mr. Zelensky defended the value of the peace talks.

“I think that without negotiations we cannot end this war,” he said. “I think that all the people who think that this dialogue is shallow and that it’s not going to resolve anything, they just don’t understand that this is very valuable.”

He said: “If there is just 1 percent chance for us to stop this war, I think that we need to take this chance. We need to do that.”

The Ukrainian president stressed his hopes for peace even as he spoke of atrocities committed by Russian forces against the Ukrainian people, particularly children. “Russian forces have come to exterminate us, to kill us,” he said.

Now, he said, the Ukrainian “people are feeling hatred towards them, animosity, and they will continue to kill Russians because Russians have killed their children.”

Without a peace settlement, he warned, the war might escalate still more.

“If these attempts fail,” he said, “that would mean that this is a third World War.”

In Warsaw, the Polish capital, murals painted in yellow and blue and anti-war signs are seen in support for Ukraine.

LG Electronics is joining other consumer electronics companies like Apple and Microsoft in suspending shipments of its products to Russia. In a two-sentence news release that did not mention the word "Ukraine," the Seoul-based maker of televisions and appliances said that it was “deeply concerned for the health and safety of all people” and that it would continue “to keep a close watch on the situation as it unfolds.”

After a residential complex was hit in Ukraine’s capital, Mykola, 80, was comforted by a volunteer on Sunday. The United Nations estimates that more than three million civilians have been displaced by the Russian invasion.

At a depot in Kyiv, volunteers worked to sort aid donations.

And at the main train station in the capital, Ukrainians unloaded humanitarian aid.

KYIV, Ukraine — The historic center of Kyiv, usually bustling with tourists and souvenir stalls around its pastel-colored buildings and golden domed churches, is largely deserted these days. Shops and offices are closed, and the city, placed under curfew from 8 p.m., falls dark and silent at night.

Nearly half the population left the city through the first weeks of war in a chaotic exodus that blocked the roads and swamped the central train station. But just as many people remained — an estimated two million. Some stayed because they did not have the means to leave, or a place to go to, but others did so from a sense of patriotism or a newfound defiance in the face of the Russian invasion.

People were still out walking their dogs in a park by St. Andrew’s Church, above the Dnieper River on Sunday morning, even as the sound of heavy bombardment rolled like thunder from the northern suburbs of the city.

“I don’t want to leave,” said Galina Sizikova, 48, an architect who was walking her husky near the central St. Sophia’s Cathedral. “I have a lot of opportunities to do something to help.” Her daughters were grown up and had gone to stay with relatives in Vienna and she had stayed behind with her dog, Avrora.

She was spending her time sewing, making bulletproof vests for volunteers who have signed up to join the territorial defense forces. “A lot of friends went to fight,” she said. “My hobby is sewing so I went into production.”

The people who had stayed in the neighborhood had bonded, she said. “We became closer,” she said. “Even those who were not friendly before, we are together now. Some prepare food.”

The invasion has galvanized the population, fostering a unity that few had felt before; spawning enthusiasm for volunteering and solidarity for the men fighting, but also a stubborn refusal to be cowed by the invader.

“The Ukrainian people have been reborn,” said Oleg Sentsov, a filmmaker who was imprisoned in Russia for his opposition to the annexation of the Crimea peninsula from Ukraine in 2014. Mr. Sentsov said he evacuated his family to western Ukraine and joined the territorial defense within a day of the invasion, and he has already been serving in the suburbs of Kyiv.

“Of course the war is terrible,” he said, “and many people are dying but there is a feeling that our nation is being born and our connections to Russia are being cut.”

The day after a missile smashed into the yard of their apartment building on the north side of the city, an army of volunteers turned out with brooms and dumpster trucks to clean up the debris.

Three volunteers were helping Viktor Chernyatevich, 75, sweep up the shattered glass in his fifth-floor apartment. He escaped by a miracle as he was standing in his hallway at 8.01 a.m. when the missile struck, but his apartment caught the full brunt of the explosion, its balcony sheared off and his belongings were wrecked.

He had sent his daughter and grandchildren to take refuge in Poland in the first days of the war, but like many working-class Ukrainians he stayed to guard his property.

“Who would be here to turn off the water and gas?” Mr. Chernyatevich said. Even after the damage from the explosion, he said he would remain in the apartment and had canvas ready to cover the shattered windows. “I was a construction worker, I can do these things,” he said.

His neighbors said they would stay as well. “We are rooted in Kyiv, married for 38 years,” said Frida Maslovska, 71, standing at her door wrapped in a woolen scarf and hat. The explosion shook the walls like an earthquake, she said, but her husband was opposed to leaving. “He says we should support people,” she said. Asked what she wanted, she smiled and answered, “I would like to live here, in my apartment, my ugly apartment.”

Mr. Chernyatevich was one of the few prepared to contemplate a long, grim war.

“The longer it goes on, the more Ukrainians will lose, and the more Russians will lose,” he said. “And then we will come to a solution and say, ‘Why do we have a war?’”

At the site of another missile strike where firefighters had to evacuate people from a burning building, the mayor, Vitali Klitschko, said people had refused his offer to evacuate them to safety and asked for weapons instead. A former world heavyweight boxing champion, Mr. Klitschko said that the Russian airstrikes were creating more anger in the population.

“Nobody feels safe right now in the whole Ukraine, not just in the capital,” he said, “but I tell you, right now, people don’t want to leave,” he said. “And those people do not just want to stay in Kyiv. They are ready to defend our city.”

For days volunteers and security forces have been rescuing people from the northern suburbs of Kyiv that are under bombardment, ferrying them to checkpoints on the edge of the city where buses take them to overnight shelters.

Disheveled, eyes staring with shock, they described a harrowing ordeal of living for days without water, electricity and heating, with diminishing food supplies as mortar and artillery fire landed closer.

“We should have left in the first days,” said Valentin Tkachenko, 67, who was evacuated on Thursday with his wife, teenage children and a neighbor.

“No one thought it would be so bad. They said it would take a while for Russian troops to come.”

Beside him, a pensioner sat nodding happily as she ate her way through thick slices of bread handed her by a volunteer. Another woman said she had not wanted to leave because she owned a dog and 11 cats. Eventually, she was forced to go and left the animals behind.

Many of those rescued from Irpin, Bucha and other war-torn suburbs in recent days have been old and infirm, some barely able to walk unaided, an indication that a large percentage of those who remain in the capital may not have the means or ability to escape. Pensioners are often out in the streets, waiting in line at the banks to draw their pension payments, or shopping at grocery stores.

Kyiv has not suffered the same level of destruction of some of Ukraine’s cities — such as Kharkiv, Mariupol, Chernihiv and Mykolaiv — and some residents said they were confident that the city had good air defenses, but Russian attacks have been increasing. Two cruise missiles seemed to pierce the defense system, causing devastating damage in two districts last week, and others have been intercepted but the remnants have killed people and damaged buildings where they fell.

The Kyiv City Council announced last week that 228 people have died and more than 900 have been wounded in three weeks of war in the capital. Four of the dead were children.

“It’s not a good joke, but it’s absolutely like Russian roulette,” said Vyacheslav Ostapenko, 55, who works for a Ukrainian TV network, Channel 5. He and his partner, Iryna Popova, a puppeteer and author of children's stories, are among the many middle-class professionals who chose to stay in Kyiv.

Mr. Ostapenko said his parents and sister, a documentary film director, were also still in Kyiv, one of his reasons to stay. The couple had spent three weeks sleeping in the corridor, away from the windows, so they had avoided injury but the apartment was no longer safe.

“I want to stay in Ukraine but the question now is where?” he said.

JERUSALEM — President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine appealed to the sentiments of Jewish Israelis but also criticized Israeli policies on Sunday in a virtual address to lawmakers that touched on the most painful periods of Jewish history and what he called the parallel experiences of the Ukrainian people.

The address was set up to be emotionally charged: President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia has branded the Ukrainian government “pro-Nazi,” and controlled by “little Nazis,” even though Mr. Zelensky is Jewish.

Mr. Zelensky, for his part, has thanked the Israeli leader, Prime Minister Naftali Bennett, for his mediation efforts with Russia, but has also castigated the Israeli government for not taking a strong enough moral stand on Ukraine’s side — a position he reiterated on Sunday.

“It is possible to mediate between countries,” Mr. Zelensky said in his 10-minute address, during which he spoke Ukrainian, “but not between good and evil.”

Mr. Zelensky appeared to make comparisons between the current suffering of the Ukrainians and that of the Jews during the Holocaust — an equation that some Israeli lawmakers later said went a step too far. 

He asked why Israel had refused to provide Ukraine with weapons like Iron Dome, Israel’s vaunted anti-rocket missile defense system, and asked Israel to take in more refugees.

“Our people are now wandering in the world, seeking security,” he said, “as you once did.”

Israel has refused Ukrainian requests to provide even defensive equipment such as helmets, but has sent aid, including six large generators, and is in the process of setting up a field hospital in Mostyska, in western Ukraine.

More than 11,000 Ukrainian citizens have arrived in Israel since the start of the war, the majority of them non-Jews. After initially limiting entry to 5,000 refugees, Israel’s interior minister, Ayelet Shaked, under public and political pressure, expanded the guidelines to offer temporary refuge to Ukrainian citizens who have relatives living in Israel, on condition that they receive approval before boarding a plane to Israel.

Israel’s Supreme Court is hearing a petition against the limitations on the entry of refugees that was initiated by the Ukrainian ambassador to Israel, Yevgen Korniychuk.

Israel’s Knesset, or Parliament, is currently in recess, and no special gathering was convened for Mr. Zelensky’s speech, so most of the 120 lawmakers and several ministers who do not sit in Parliament tuned in from their offices or homes. Since the assembly hall is undergoing renovations, the speaker of the Knesset, Mickey Levy, introduced Mr. Zelensky from a conference room in the Parliament building.

Mr. Zelensky’s speech was broadcast live on all the main television channels and was screened in a public square in Tel Aviv, where crowds had gathered. Many people were waving Ukrainian flags.

Mr. Zelensky has already addressed other assemblies, including the United States Congress, the Canadian, British and Polish Parliaments as well as the German Bundestag.

The lower-key event in Israel, with the lawmakers watching Mr. Zelensky’s address remotely on their own screens, was in keeping with Mr. Bennett’s balancing act aimed at also maintaining good relations with the Kremlin. Israel has a strong interest in being able to continue its military campaign against Iranian entrenchment in Syria, where Russia maintains a significant presence. In addition, Israeli officials have expressed concerns about the large Jewish community in Russia.

Russia’s ambassador to Israel, Anatoly Viktorov, had expressed Moscow’s displeasure with Israel’s intention to host Mr. Zelensky’s parliamentary address. In a meeting with Mr. Levy, the Parliament speaker, last week, Mr. Viktorov spoke of Russia’s main objectives in the conflict, including the “denazification and demilitarization” of Ukraine, according to the Russian Embassy in Israel, and discussed “the development of Russian-Israeli inter-parliamentary interaction,” according to the embassy.

After more than three weeks without being able to leave the Chernobyl nuclear power plant in northern Ukraine, 64 workers were able to be rotated out, the plant said on Sunday.

Staff at the plant, which includes more than 200 technical personnel and guards, had not been able to rotate shifts since Feb. 23, a day before Russian forces took control of the site, according to the International Atomic Energy Agency, which serves as a nuclear watchdog for the United Nations.

In a Facebook post, the plant said that to rotate the 64 workers, 46 volunteers were sent to the site to make sure operations at the plant could continue. It was unclear whether the remaining workers would also have an opportunity to be rotated.

For weeks, the International Atomic Energy Agency, known as the I.A.E.A., has expressed concern for the workers at the Chernobyl site, calling for the staff to be rotated for their safety and security.

Rafael Mariano Grossi, director general of the I.A.E.A., said on Sunday that the workers “deserve our full respect and admiration for having worked in these extremely difficult circumstances.”

“They were there for far too long,” he said. “I sincerely hope that remaining staff from this shift can also rotate soon.”

The I.A.E.A. said on March 13 that workers were no longer doing repairs and maintenance, partly because of “physical and psychological fatigue.”

In a Facebook post last week, the plant said that there were enough food supplies and that “fortunately, everyone is alive and well.”

Workers at the site have faced a number of issues recently, including a power outage and limited communication. Ukrainian government officials said on March 9 that damage by Russian forces had “disconnected” the plant from outside electricity, leaving the site dependent on power from diesel generators and backup supplies. Power was restored a few days later, and the plant resumed normal operating conditions.

Earlier this month, after Russian forces took command of the plant, the I.A.E.A. said that it had received a report from Ukraine’s nuclear regulator that it was only able to communicate with the workers through email.

The war in Ukraine has delivered a shock to global energy markets. Now the planet is facing a deeper crisis: a shortage of food.

A crucial portion of the world’s wheat, corn and barley is trapped in Russia and Ukraine because of the war, while an even larger portion of the world’s fertilizers is stuck in Russia and Belarus. The result is that global food and fertilizer prices are soaring. Since the invasion last month, wheat prices have increased by 21 percent, barley by 33 percent and some fertilizers by 40 percent.

The upheaval is compounded by major challenges that were already increasing prices and squeezing supplies, including the pandemic, shipping constraints, high energy costs and recent droughts, floods and fires.

Now economists, aid organizations and government officials are warning of the repercussions: an increase in world hunger.

The looming disaster is laying bare the consequences of a major war in the modern era of globalization. Prices for food, fertilizer, oil, gas and even metals like aluminum, nickel and palladium are all rising fast — and experts expect worse as the effects cascade.

“Ukraine has only compounded a catastrophe on top of a catastrophe,” said David M. Beasley, the executive director of the World Food Program, the United Nations agency that feeds 125 million people a day. “There is no precedent even close to this since World War II.”

Ukrainian farms are about to miss critical planting and harvesting seasons. European fertilizer plants are significantly cutting production because of high energy prices. Farmers from Brazil to Texas are cutting back on fertilizer, threatening the size of the next harvests.

China, facing its worst wheat crop in decades after severe flooding, is planning to buy much more of the world’s dwindling supply. And India, which ordinarily exports a small amount of wheat, has already seen foreign demand more than triple compared with last year.

Around the world, the result will be even higher grocery bills. In February, U.S. grocery prices were already up 8.6 percent over a year prior, the largest increase in 40 years, according to government data. Economists expect the war to further inflate those prices.

For those living on the brink of food insecurity, the latest surge in prices could push many over the edge. After remaining mostly flat for five years, hunger rose by about 18 percent during the pandemic to between 720 million and 811 million people. Earlier this month, the United Nations said that the war’s impact on the global food market alone could cause an additional 7.6 million to 13.1 million people to go hungry.

The World Food Program’s costs have already increased by $71 million a month, enough to cut daily rations for 3.8 million people. “We’ll be taking food from the hungry to give to the starving,” Mr. Beasley said.

Rising prices and hunger also present a potential new dimension to the world’s view of the war. Could they further fuel anger at Russia and calls for intervention? Or would frustration be targeted at the Western sanctions that are helping to trap food and fertilizer?

While virtually every country will face higher prices, some places could struggle to find enough food at all. 

Armenia, Mongolia, Kazakhstan and Eritrea have imported virtually all of their wheat from Russia and Ukraine and must find new sources. But they are competing against much larger buyers, including Turkey, Egypt, Bangladesh and Iran, which have obtained more than 60 percent of their wheat from the two warring countries.

And all of them will be bidding on an even smaller supply because China, the world’s biggest producer and consumer of wheat, is expected to buy much more than usual on world markets this year. On March 5, China revealed that severe flooding last year had delayed the planting of a third of the country’s wheat crop, and now the upcoming harvest looks bleak.

“This year’s seedling situation can be said to be the worst in history,” said China’s agriculture minister, Tang Renjian.

 Rising food prices have long been a catalyst for social and political upheavals in poor African and Arab countries, and many subsidize staples like bread in efforts to avoid such problems. But their economies and budgets — already strained by the pandemic and high energy costs — are now at risk of buckling under the cost of food, economists said.

Tunisia struggled to pay for some food imports before the war and now is trying to prevent an economic collapse. Inflation has already set off protests in Morocco and is helping stir renewed unrest and violent crackdowns in Sudan.

“A lot of people think that this is just going to mean that their bagels are going to become more expensive. And that’s absolutely true, but that’s not what this is about,” said Ben Isaacson, a longtime agriculture analyst with Scotiabank. Since the 1970s, North Africa and the Middle East have grappled with repeated uprisings. “What actually led to people going into the streets and protesting?” he said. “It starts from food shortages and from food price inflation.”

Countries afflicted by protracted conflict, including Yemen, Syria, South Sudan and Ethiopia, are already facing severe hunger emergencies that experts fear could quickly worsen.

In Afghanistan, aid workers warn that the humanitarian crisis has already been exacerbated by the war in Ukraine, making it more difficult to feed the roughly 23 million Afghans — more than half the population — who do not have enough to eat.

Nooruddin Zaker Ahmadi, the director of Bashir Navid Complex, an Afghan imports company, said that prices were rising across the board. It took him five days in Russia this month to find cooking oil. He bought 15-liter cartons for $30 each and will sell them at the Afghan market for $35. Before the war, he sold them for $23.

“The United States thinks it has only sanctioned Russia and its banks,” he said. “But the United States has sanctioned the whole world.”

For the global food market, there are few worse countries to be in conflict than Russia and Ukraine. Over the past five years, they have together accounted for nearly 30 percent of the exports of the world’s wheat, 17 percent of corn, 32 percent of barley, a crucial source of animal feed, and 75 percent of sunflower seed oil, an important cooking oil in some parts of the world.

Russia has largely been unable to export food because of sanctions that have effectively cut it off financially. Ukraine, meanwhile, has been cut off physically. Russia has blocked the Black Sea for exports, and Ukraine lacks enough rail cars to transport food overland.

What is now becoming more worrisome is the next harvest, particularly in Ukraine. On March 11, Ukraine’s agriculture minister begged allies for 1,900 rail cars of fuel, saying that the country’s farms had run out after supplies were diverted to the military. Without that fuel, he said, Ukrainian farmers would be unable to plant or harvest.

There are other hurdles. The United Nations estimated that up to 30 percent of Ukrainian farmland could become a war zone. And with millions of Ukrainians fleeing the country or joining the front lines, far fewer can work the fields.

Russian and Ukrainian wheat is not easily replaced. Inventories are already tight in the United States and Canada, according to the United Nations, while Argentina is limiting exports and Australia is already at full shipping capacity. Over the past year, wheat prices are up 69 percent. Among other major food exports of Russia and Ukraine, corn prices are up 36 percent and barley 82 percent.

The war also threatens another longer-term shock to the food markets: a shortage of fertilizer.

Matt Huie, a farmer near Corpus Christi, Texas, said that skyrocketing prices had already forced him to stop applying fertilizer to the grazing fields that nourish his hundreds of cows, assuring that they will be skinnier come slaughter. Now he is worried he will have to also reduce fertilizer for his next corn crop, which would slash its yield. “We’ve gotten into uncharted territory,” he said.

Russia is the world’s largest fertilizer exporter, providing about 15 percent of the world supply. This month, just as farmers around the world prepared for planting, Russia told its fertilizer producers to halt exports. Sanctions already were making such transactions difficult.

Sanctions also have hit Russia’s closest ally, Belarus, a leading producer of potash-based fertilizer, critical for many major crops including soybeans and corn. But even before the Ukraine war, Belarus’s fertilizer exports were blocked because of sanctions over its seizure of an expatriate dissident who had been a passenger in a Ryanair jetliner forced to land in the country.

In another ominous signal to fertilizer customers, earlier this month European fertilizer producers said they were slowing or halting production because of soaring energy prices. Many fertilizers are made with natural gas.

The world’s major fertilizers have now more than doubled or tripled in price over the past year.

Brazil, the world’s largest producer of soybeans, purchases nearly half its potash fertilizer from Russia and Belarus. It now has just three months of stockpiles left. The national soybean farmers association has instructed members to use less fertilizer, if any, this season. Brazil’s soybean crop, already diminished by a severe drought, is now likely to be even smaller. 

“They’re preventing fertilizers from getting to producing countries,” said Antonio Galvan, the soybean association’s president, criticizing international sanctions. “How many millions are going starve to death because of the lack of these fertilizers?”

Brazil sells most of its soybeans to China, which uses much of the crop to feed livestock. Fewer, more expensive soybeans could force ranchers to cut back on such animal feed, meaning smaller cows, pigs and chickens — and higher prices for meat.

Jon Bakehouse, a corn and soybean farmer in Hastings, Iowa, said he prepaid for fertilizer late last year because he worried about a looming shortage.His fertilizer still has not arrived, and he now has less than a month to apply it to his corn crop. Without it, he said, his yields would be halved.

“You know when they show the cars jumping in slow motion and the passengers inside are up in the air? That’s what it feels like,” he said. “We’re all just kind of suspended in the air, waiting for the car to land. Who knows if it’s going to be a nice, gentle landing, or if it’s going to be a nosedive into the ditch.”