“‘Peanuts Vol. 3’ (I think) … made it cool to be excited about Beethoven’s birthday,” says the musician Jeremy Denk, whose new memoir is “Every Good Boy Does Fine.”

What books are on your night stand?

In Manhattan, my night stand has been commandeered by a CPAP machine. I chose breathing over reading. But in my barn in the Catskills I have a large, weathered bed table — it could almost be a dining table. I called my barn-sitter, Alex, to find out what books were sitting there:

Daniel Gilbert’s “Stumbling on Happiness” (never opened — but I did spill a cocktail on it), “Don Quixote,” Emeril Lagasse’s “Creole Christmas” (for the banana cream pie recipe), “The Complete Poems of Emily Dickinson,” Horace’s “Odes,” an essay collection called “Against Everything” (purchased after one November’s daylight saving time switch) and “Barns of New York.”

After listing all these, Alex said, “You’re a [expletive] hipster [expletive].” I couldn’t disagree. He added, helpfully: “… an aging hipster [expletive].”

What’s the last great book you read?

During the pandemic, my editor sent me one of his other projects: George Saunders’s book on Russian short stories, “A Swim in a Pond in the Rain.” A double treat. Each story more brilliant and uncanny than the last. Plus unpretentious unpackings of their craft. Works with so much misery and difficulty and death, and Saunders showing how alive they are, extracting the joy held within the gloom.

Are there any classic novels that you only recently read for the first time?

“To the Lighthouse.”

Describe your ideal reading experience (when, where, what, how).

In a large porcelain bathtub overlooking the crashing Atlantic Ocean and coves east of Penzance, in Cornwall, after a harrowing swim and before a warm pint of bitter ale.

What’s your favorite book no one else has heard of?

“Proxies,” by Brian Blanchfield — an essay collection that appears at first dry, didactic, even perverse. I enjoy art that antagonizes you, and then, slowly, in an emotional striptease, reveals a gooey, loving center. Blanchfield’s sentences have incredible rhythm.

Which writers — novelists, playwrights, critics, journalists, poets — working today do you admire most?

A strange choice, but I have never forgotten Kathryn Schulz’s piece on the inevitable earthquake and tsunami in the Pacific Northwest. Her science writing possesses wit and vividness. And how can I not admire Alex Ross, also, a beautiful evangelist for all kinds of unusual music in a difficult and fraught time?

Putting on my gay hat, I do love the unflinching observations of Garth Greenwell. I also find the substack of Brandon Taylor to be an interesting read, and terrifying, both how much he is able to write and the confidence of the cultural criticism, combined with personal revelation.

Zadie Smith, an astounding stylist and mind. Gary Shteyngart, also, a fellow Oberlin grad, and a humorist my father would have admired.

What book, if any, most contributed to your artistic development as a musician?

Emerson’s essays. The rapturous pursuit of an idea, the improvisatory feel, the merging of European artistic wanderlust with the down-home American frame.

Runner-up: “Peanuts Vol. 3” (I think), which made it cool to be excited about Beethoven’s birthday.

Who are your favorite musician-writers? Your favorite memoir by a musician?

No question Patti Smith, though being a hopeless classical geek I don’t pretend to understand her world — but she has such flowing, open, heartfelt prose. Charles Rosen was and is a quintessential classical music choice, the pianist-thinker-writer. He has tremendous insight to offer, if you don’t mind some wonk, and a whiff of bitchy elitism. The composer Robert Schumann was an inventive and joyous writer, maybe more than any other dead white male composer.

My favorite musician memoir is Louis Moreau Gottschalk’s “Notes of a Pianist.” He was at once a genius, a narcissist and a con man — the true artist trifecta. He complains about the touring life in fountains of hilarious 19th-century prose. He travels on night trains across America, plays his reliable audience-pleasers on jangling unreliable pianos, gets paid a portion of the receipts, is heckled and adored, consumes rotten food and, no matter how harried the schedule, finds ample time to admire local ladies.

What are the best books about music and musical performance you’ve read, fiction or non?

I recommend (as always) E. T. A. Hoffmann. Try “The Fermata” and the mock-memoir masterpiece “The Life and Opinions of the Tomcat Murr,” a book for cat lovers, music lovers and meta lovers. Hoffmann hits for me the sweet spot of go-between narrator, neither impassive or emotionally caught up, empathetic but bemused, like Kermit the Frog.

The magnificent singer Ian Bostridge wrote a thoughtful, deep book on “Winterreise.” My friend Steven Isserlis, a musician’s musician, wrote an essential companion to the Bach Cello Suites. We have to be grateful to Anne Midgette for sitting with Leon Fleisher and recording his life and musical insights, and there are recent memoirs from the great pianists Andras Schiff, Stephen Hough and Alfred Brendel. One wishes for Mitsuko Uchida to write something!

Personally, right now I’m deep in, re-re-reading and thinking through Susan McClary’s great, controversial work of feminist musicology: “Feminine Endings.” She takes no prisoners, dismantling the mantles of Western classical narratives, and reinserting sex into musicology’s often musty domain.

Do you count any books as guilty pleasures?

As the son of a lapsed monk, all my pleasures are guilty.

Has a book ever brought you closer to another person, or come between you?

I often talked books with my late friend, the composer Michael Friedman. I told him I loved Franzen’s “The Corrections.” The book saw into my soul. It was the novel-length rant I would have composed about my family if only I hadn’t been so busy practicing the piano! But then “Freedom” came out — and God I hated it, with a verbose passion. For months, every time I saw Michael, I would start in again on how disappointing it was. Michael defended Franzen, mildly, then stridently. One night, in a speakeasy in the West Village, he’d had enough. He screamed across the table, “Not again with ‘Freedom’!” The maître d’ looked up with alarm. In a quieter, urgent tone Michael added that I should go to therapy because my obsessive harping was making me even more annoying than Jonathan Franzen’s characters. That shut me up.

After my father was diagnosed with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease later in life, we also talked about books. It was the only way we could be, if not emotional, at least emotion-adjacent. He desperately wanted to know what I liked. I said I was excited to read the latest David Foster Wallace — “The Pale King” — and so my dad purchased it, and we started in. A book club of two. A third of the way through, I began to realize I was forcing him to spend his precious time wandering down twisted self-recursive prose visions of bureaucratic misery that I wasn’t even sure I wanted to finish. So I called and said, “Dad, I’m so sorry!” He sighed with relief.

I suggested “Pnin” instead. God bless him, he dutifully bought that one too. Some weeks later, he called me. “The dishwashing scene,” he said, with a tiny quaver in his voice, and that was it. This pierced me right through the heart. How Pnin drops a leggy nutcracker into the sudsy sink full of glass and hears a mysterious crack. How does Nabokov manage to make the prosaic act so luminous? We discussed how Pnin replaced the aquamarine glass bowl safe on the shelf, a gift from his estranged stepson, and I realized that we were the same, in essential ways, and nonetheless we would never truly connect.

What’s the most interesting thing you learned from a book recently?

Laurence Dreyfus (in his wonderful “Wagner and the Erotic Impulse”) made me aware that Richard Wagner had a fetish for composing in silk lingerie, and he sent Nietzsche out shopping to get him new undergarments. The vision of Nietzsche browsing in the underwear store!

Which subjects do you wish more authors would write about?

One of the problems I have with lots of music writing is that it’s not about music: It’s about the surrounding world, or the lives of musicians. Now, I totally understand why this is! Most people don’t want musical notes explained to them, really. Music is such a key, raw, primal sensory experience. But of course, being an insider, I want to know how Nina Simone knew how to sing just a little off the beat sometimes and right with it other times. How she made her brilliant, crafty decisions — something I could never really know, and she might not want to reveal.

What moves you most in a work of literature?

Unexpected epiphanies.

Which genres do you especially enjoy reading? And which do you avoid?

I crave free-ranging, personal collections of essays. Sorry to invoke Wallace again, but “A Supposedly Fun Thing I’ll Never Do Again” is one of my favorite books: the long essay on TV and irony, and those two virtuosic comic-journalistic pieces (Illinois State Fair, Cruise). I adored Elif Batuman’s book/memoir/essay about studying Russian literature, “The Possessed.” Geoff Dyer, sometimes, is my hero (and other times you savor the pleasure of hating him).

And M. F. K. Fisher! Her essay voice is such an ideal: the funny-serious explainer, who lectures without lecturing, smiling from her stern podium of style. Maybe I’m still in love with a certain kind of teacher from my past.

I try to avoid books that explain what they’re about to do before they do it.

How do you organize your books?

I asked Alex and he suggested “towers of random and dangerous heights, reaching dustily toward the heavens, placed for maximum inconvenience and with no regard for rodent infestation.”

What’s the best book you’ve ever received as a gift?

My second summer at the legendary Marlboro Music School, the pianist Richard Goode (my idol) gave me a worn, used copy of Randall Jarrell’s “Pictures From an Institution.” I was confused why a rich and famous pianist couldn’t afford a new copy! It was years until I understood that from his perspective the used copy was a far greater, more personal gift.

What kind of reader were you as a child? Which childhood books and authors stick with you most?

Obsessive and joyful. But also manipulative! I used reading as one of many pretexts to avoid chores. Loved the Narnias, and “The Wind in the Willows,” but my deepest affection was Tove Jansson’s “Finn Family Moomintroll” — even at 7 years old, I thought nostalgia was the best emotion.

You’re organizing a literary dinner party. Which three writers, dead or alive, do you invite?

Start with M. F. K. Fisher — hoping (rudely) that she might advise on the cooking? I’ve always wanted to meet Catullus. I think he would liven up the joint. Once you have those two, it gets tricky. Do you grab an observant, masterful novelist to herd the conversation, like Mary McCarthy or James Baldwin? Or do you just say screw it and invite Jack Kerouac or Anaïs Nin?

What do you plan to read next?

“Shuggie Bain,” by Douglas Stuart. And I’ll reread “Mrs. Dalloway,” because I remember that book giving me so many shivers.